+++
title = "07 S.N. Sastri"
date = "2008-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-March/019847.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-March/019847.html)

On 3/1/08, advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org <
advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
>
> Now I need the correct Anganyasa, Karanyasa, and Dhayana slokams of
> Ganapati Mantra and Shakti Panchakshari Mantra. I am metioning few
> starting words and ending words of each slokam for your reference (as
> there may be many different dhayna slokas.) Any help from you would be
> highly appreciated.
> Regards,
> Nookala Satish Kumar.
>
> Dear Shri Satish Kumar,
> The dhyana sloka for Ganapati mantra which I chant starts with bIjApUra.
> The correct sloka is given below:
> (I am following Itrans for the transliteration).
> bIjApUra gadekshu karmukarujA chakrAbjapASotpala
> vrIhyagra svavishANa ratnakalaSa prodyat karAmbhoruhaH
> dhyeyo vallabhayA sapadmakarayA SlishTojjvalad bhUshayA
> viSvotpatti vipatti samsthitikaro vighneSa ishTArthadaH :
> (If you want, I shall send this to you as a private mail in Devanagari
> script).
>
> The nyasas are—glam, gleem, glUm, glaim, glaum, glaH.
>
>
> My dhyanasloka for shakti panchakshari mantra starts with—mUle
> kalpadrumasya.
> What you have given seems to be a garbled version of this sloka. So I am
> giving the correct sloka:
>
> mule kalpadrumasya drutakanakanibham chAru padmAsanastham
> vAmAnkArUDha gaurI nibiDa kuchabharAbhoga gADhopagUDham.
> nAnAlankArakAntam vara paraSu mRigAbhIti hastam triNetram
> vande bAlendumaulim gajavadana guhASlishTa pArSvam maheSam.
>
> (In the above transliteration, capital S is used for the first letter of
> Sankara and sh is used for the first letter of shanmukha.
>
> The nyasas are—Om hrAm, Om hrIm, Om hrUm, Om hraim, Om hraum, Om hraH.
> Best wishes,
> S.N.Sastri
>
> --
>
>
> ------------------------------
>
> _______________________________________________
> ****************************************
>

