+++
title = "142 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2019-10-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053324.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053324.html)

Today is Mula puja i.e Maha Saraswati puja of the Sarnnavaratri.As it is the 7th Day i.e Maha Saptami, under the auspicious constellation of the 'Mula Nakshatra' The goddess reveals her vidya to the Sadhaka's.
ShriVarahi Devi:Prapanchasara Gantha says that the Parabindu divides into twoparts, of which the right is Bindu, the male, Purusha or Ham, and the leftVisarga the female, Prakriti or Sah, making the combined Hamsah. Hamsah is theunion of Prakriti and Purusha and the universe is Hamsah - The Garland ofLetters, Sir John Woodroffe
Varahi isDandanatha i.e supreme commander for chief of army of Godess Lalita MahaTripurasundari. No one is able to stop her force after the instruction or orderfrom Lalita devi after the advise from minister Raja Rajeswari (Mantrini: RajaSyamala). Her four alchemical elements (dhatus) are known as the four fires.Kurukulla's alchemical elements are known as the five Shaktis. The combinationof these five Shaktis (downward pointing triangles) and four fires (upwardpointing triangles), forms the complex figure in the centre of the Shri Cakra.Varahi's four are the twelve (three x four) sun kalas, twelve siderealconstellations. Kurukulla's five triangles are the fifteen (five x three) Kalasof the moon, fifteen lunar days. Thecomplete individual grows within nine months to be born as a Shri Yantra orplant. The flowering of this plant is shown by the 24 petals of the yantra.

Both Varahi andKurukulla are connected with, but separate from the sixteen Nityas (fifteendays of the bright fortnight plus Lalita herself). As with all other prayogas/Proceduresfor Yagna’s, a sadhaka who is only qualified (adhikari) should perform theserites if (a) she or he is initiated, and (b) does the daily puja ofTripurasundari. Varahi is the "father form", while Kurukulla is the"mother form" of the devata. One should worship using the 110 lettersof the Varahi vidya in the centre (of the yantra) which leads to siddhi. Aftergiving animal to the goddess using the sixteenth syllable and after one hasworshipped all with ritual accessories, one should recite the vidya 1000 or 100times. One should do havan using pure and good sesamum, rice or ghee, then thevidya becomes successful. 

A sage ofcontrolled senses, able to perform Havan, should do puja at the twilights. Heshould recite the vidya 100,000 times -- giving oblation of one tenth part ofthat. After doing the worship and invocation, the mantra becomes successful -ONLY- if one is compassionate, devoted to Guru, contented, patient and ofpeaceful mind. No agitated mind will give the fruitful results. If oneshould perform a rite for a specific application devotedly, it gives whateveris desired immediately, giving the favour and grace of Devi to the tirelesspractitioner and it is certain , happens in practicality.One should meditate onDevi in the form previously described during great wars, as being in the centreof the sun's circle If one should then recite the vidya with concentrated mind,after invoking her into water via breath during rituals for a period of sevendays, one's enemy will run far far away from that field by leaving everythingthere. 
Maheshwara told Parameshvari,if a sadhaka should worship the yellow effulgent one, the paralyser, withyellow flowers, using the previously declared tongue method, for a number ofdays, the array of the enemies in battle and whatever else one desires areparalysed instantly. If one should worship the red Devi at midnight, using redflowers, one may enslave or kill all enemies, this is certain. This should beapplied in protecting the borders and protection of our mother land/country thenYama lords it over the enemies. 
Note: This information is only aliterature/scripts collection based, All the activitiesshould be performed under the able guidance of the self-realized soul /sadhaka's/GURU ONLY. Other wise any small mistakes reverts very badly and you will never know where you stand there.

Sri Guru Padaravindarpana MastuKameswara

