+++
title = "383 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2016-03-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040675.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040675.html)

A Glimpse of Advanced Samskritam (Sanskrit) in Sringeri:

Today we hear a lot that Sanskrit is declining but in Sringeri, Samskritam
(Sanskrit) is maintained at the highest standard. Every year during Sri
Mahaganapati Vakyartha Vidwat Sabha, about 50 erudite shastric scholars
across the country participate and deliberate in chaste Sanskrit for 13
days starting from Vinayaka Chaturthi day, under the presidentship of the
Jagadguru Shankaracharya of Sringeri. The Sringeri Jagadguru is present
throughout the 4-hour session everyday and mediates the discussions and
delivers verdicts.

More on Sri Mahaganapati Vakyartha Vidwat Sabha:

Sri Sharada Peetham at Sringeri undertakes propagation of Sanatana Dharma
through a number of channels.

The Jagadguru Shankaracharya of Sringeri is widely revered as the supreme
authority in the Shastras. The annual Mahaganapati Vakyartha Vidwat Sabha
conducted for about 12 days during the Vinayaka Chaturthi festival is
unmatched in the scholarship of the discussions, that take place entirely
in Sanskrit under the presidentship of the Jagadguru Shankaracharya of
Sringeri. Invitation to this Sabha is extended to about 50 of the brightest
of the scholars across the country. The scholars deliberate for about an
hour on a chosen topic in one of the four Shastras - Advaita Vedanta,
Mimama, Vyakarana or Nyaya. The Sringeri Jagadguru is present throughout
the 4-hour session everyday and mediates the discussions and delivers
verdicts.

In 1992, the present Shankaracharya of Sringeri, Jagadguru Sri Bharati
Tirtha Mahaswamiji instituted the Shastra Poshaka Sabha to foster the study
of Shastras. Any scholar and student can affiliate themselves to the Sabha
and receive a monthly stipend for a period of 5 years. The student is
required to pass with distinction an examination conducted by the Sabha
every 6 months. The final examination is conducted by the Sringeri
Jagadguru during the Mahaganapati Vakyartha Vidwat Sabha. The successful
candidates are awarded the title "Vidwat Pravara" during the Valedictory
function of the Sabha. Over the last decade and a half, 50 new scholars
have been generated. It is a joy for all that due to the efforts of the
Shastra Poshaka Sabha, the percentage of young scholars participating in
the prestigious Mahaganapati Vakyartha Vidwat Sabha has been increasing
over the years.

The Peetham takes great interest in promotion of Sanskrit, the language of
the Shastras. The Pathashalas run by the Peetham lay stress on Sanskrit
education. The Sadvidya Sanjeevini Samskrita Mahapathashala at Sringeri has
a specialized 4-year course in Samskrita Sahitya that prepares the student
for the study of Shastras. The Sabha has 5 courses taking a student from
elementary Sanskrit to being proficient in understanding Sanskrit
literature and writing in Sanskrit. The Sabha conducts examinations twice a
year, in January/February and July/August.

The present Shankaracharya, Jagadguru Sri Bharati Tirtha Mahaswamiji
effected the establishment of a Sanskrit University in Kalady, the
birthplace of Jagadguru Sri Adi Shankaracharya. The efforts of the
Mahaswamiji also brought to Sringeri and Karnataka a deemed University to
propagate Sanskrit Studies â€“ The Rajiv Gandhi Kendriya Samskrita Vidya
Peetham of the Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New Delhi.

Links:
http://www.sringeri.net/2014/10/25/news/mahaganapati-vakyartha-vidwat-sabha-4.htm

http://www.sringeri.net/2011/09/28/news/mahaganapati-vakyartha-sabha-2.htm

http://www.sringeri.net/activities/sustenence-of-sanatana-dharma/mahaganapati-vakyartha-vidwat-sadas

http://www.sringeri.net/2012/09/20/news/sri-mahaganapati-vakyartha-vidwat-sadas.htm

http://www.sringeri.net/activities/propagation-of-sanatana-dharma
