+++
title = "11 V. Chandrasekaran"
date = "2002-12-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-December/004149.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-December/004149.html)

>Sri Vidyashankar wrote in reply:
>
>>Two centuries back, for eg., no one would have seen cars or
>>aeroplanes in their dreams because they didn't have that material
>>knowledge.
>
>I disagree with this. The people who first designed cars and aeroplanes
>dreamt about them before cars and aeroplanes became material realities.
>

Yes. But it is still based on some related material knowledge acquired
by those inventors. Isn't it? For eg., a cart for a car or a bird for an
aeroplane.

>It is not correct to say that every entity in a dream has to have a
>referent
>in the "world out there" as seen in the waking state. In a dream, one can
>imagine various kinds of monsters that do not exist.
>

The images and impressions in the waking state form a set of stencils
that the subtle mind uses to make up the dream images be it an unseen
monster or an unknown invention. So even here there is a referential
knowledge at the base of the delusion. Isn't it?

>>Extending this to the "world-view as dream" concept... what is that
>>primordial material knowledge that is causing this world-view dream? Or,
>>is
>>that knowledge at all needed for our current delusion (during waking
>>state)? If not needed, why so?
>
>The question one needs to ask is, who is the dreamer of the world-view
>dream
>(if it is indeed a dream)?
>

So the knowledge is Brahman (dreamer) itself. Is it correct to say that this
same knowledge forms the basis of the delusion when manifesting as Maya
which is the creative, imaginative force behind this world-view?

Regards,
chandrasekaran.

