+++
title = "102 G. Boyd"
date = "1996-06-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004978.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004978.html)

Talking like a Jnani

This is a fundamental question driving directly to root of all sadhana
and at the same time posing a profound dilemma for the future of this
list.

It is clearly stated in the scriptures and repeated by all genuine Jnanis,
that emulating the guru is wrong. Duality MUST be maintained in the
devotee-guru relationship, whether the guru is still embodied or not.

To emulate the guru is in fact contempt of the guru and to go around
spouting "I am self-realized in reality" displays a complete lack of
understanding of the core teaching. The root of Advaita is PRACTICE
not PROLOGUE - it is also very dangerous for the sadhaka to say such
things.

It is the ego which wants to speak like a Jnani, it is the ego which wants
to think it is self-realized, it is the ego which speaks of self-realization
- because it does not and can never know it.

You can teach a parrot poetry, but is the parrot then lauded as a poet or
laughed at because it doesn't understand what it says, let alone the idea
that it can become a teacher of poetry.

It will be clear to all serious seekers that the words (verbal or written)
of a genuine Jnani stir the very core of one's Being, uplift the spirit and
open doors instantly. This is because the Jnani IS the Self of all, and the
message goes directly to the Source. This is something which only the
Jnani can do, and the same words from an ajnani not only achieve
nothing, but positively irritate or even arouse hostility to the subject.

By the same token we will all have experienced benefit from the
experience of others, in any walk of life and many circumstances - this
works in the same way, because when we speak from experience, we
touch the heart of the listener - heart to heart. Thus we should limit our
advice to our own experience, and beyond that quote the Sages, word
for word. That way the reader benefits fully from both sources instead
of losing everything.

It should be remembered - intellectual understanding of Advaita is
worthless on its own and helps no-one, especially the Intellectual.

On a second point - it is prohibited to state the Absolute Truth openly;
no-one has the right to ignore the injunctions of the Scriptures -- the
world and its people go through enough suffering at the hands of those
who purport to know even lesser truths and imagine they have a direct
link to God's ear, propounding as they do God's support for their evil
ways. Personally, I have no desire to carry the burden of the wickedness
of others, because of some jingoistic urge to spout truths I do not
comprehend, and as this list is dedicated to Advaita, it should reflect
the injunctions and recommendations of the Scriptures.

True Jnanis NEVER give identical instruction to all; their teaching is
according to the ripeness of the questioner - a ripeness which they
alone can perceive. The giving of wrong instruction can have both
unforseen and tragic consequences and such risks will always be
avoided by genuine seekers.

Let us hope that this list will not finish up being a talking shop for those
whose only interest is in intellectual superiority.

Let us also not destroy truth in our efforts to propound it.

Namaste

Graham

ps. In a few days I will be unsubscribing for seven weeks due to an
overseas trip - so please forgive any lack of response after Sunday.

