+++
title = "103 G. Boyd"
date = "1996-06-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004983.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004983.html)

Srinivas wrote -----

Your statements reminded me of a short passage from a collection of quotes
of Jiddu Krishnamurti. I thought it might interest you.

   A person who had listened to Krishnamurti for many years once said to
   him: "I see the extraordinary effect that the teachings have had on me
   and that they have on others. There seems to be something in them
   beyond the words which has the ability to change people's lives. I
   have now listened to you for many years and I know all the words. In
   terms of just words I could say many of the things that you say but I
   know that when I say them they don't have the same impact. I feel that
   this is because, while I know the teachings, I don't live them."
   Krishnamurti was nodding in agreement with this and the questioner
   continued. "My question to you is; when you say something like 'the
   world is you and you are the world' and you live it, it is clearly
   true. If I say 'you are the world and the world is you' and I don't
   live it, is that statement still true?" Krishnamurti was quiet for a
   moment and then said slowly, "Well yes, the statement is still true
   when you say it, but it has no truth in it."

regards
Srinivas.

----------------------------

Yes, that's exactly it - the above sums up everything precisely, it is upadesa
itself. Nothing more need be said on the subject.

My regards

Graham

