+++
title = "110 Kaushik Chevendra"
date = "2021-10-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-October/057608.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-October/057608.html)

Namaste.
On the auspicious occasion of ekadashi just wanted to share an excerpt from
vishnu purana.
For, Maitreya, suitable acts of expiation have been enjoined by the great
sages for every kind of crime[
<https://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/vishnu-purana-wilson/d/doc115966.html#note-e-59097>
Arduous
penances for great sins, trifling ones for minor offences, have been
propounded by Svāyambhuva
<https://www.wisdomlib.org/definition/svayambhuva#purana> and others: but
reliance upon Kṛṣṇa is far better than any such expiatory acts, as
religious austerity, or the like. Let any one who repents of the sin of
which he may have been culpable have recourse to this best of all
expiations, remembrance of Hari
<https://www.wisdomlib.org/definition/hari#purana>: by addressing his
thoughts to Nārāyaṇa <https://www.wisdomlib.org/definition/narayana#purana> at
dawn, at night, at sunset, and midday, a man shall be quickly cleansed from
all guilt: the whole heap of worldly sorrows is dispersed by meditating on
Hari; and his worshipper, looking upon heavenly fruition as an impediment
to felicity, obtains final emancipation. He
<https://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/vishnu-purana-wilson/d/doc115966.html#page-211>whose
mind is devoted to Hari in silent prayer, burnt-offering, or adoration, is
impatient even of the glory of the king of the gods. Of what avail is
ascent to the summit of heaven, if it is necessary to return from thence to
earth. How different is the meditation on Vāsudeva
<https://www.wisdomlib.org/definition/vasudeva#purana>, which is the seed
of eternal freedom. Hence, Muni, the man who thinks of Viṣṇu, day and
night, goes not to Naraka after death, for all his sins are atoned for.
