+++
title = "237 Srikrishna Ghadiyaram"
date = "2003-05-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-May/011373.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-May/011373.html)

Hari Om !!

I read the following sentences from Tattva Bodha
commentary of Swami Tejomayananda of Chinmaya Mission.

--------------
Page 49:

The mind creates, sustains and ends the dream world.
Not only the world, but also the enjoyer of this world
(the dreamer) is created by the mind. The dreamer can
have an entirely different identity from the waker.
The intellect has no role to play in the dream state.
Also, there is no notion of doership and hence no
merit or demerit is created in the dream. One is not
punished for the crime done in a dream ! There is only
the notion of enjoyership (bhoktrtvam), but again
there is no choice about whether to enjoy or suffer.

Page 50:

In the waking state I identify with the gross body and
become the doer and enjoyer. In the dream I identify
with the subtle body and become the enjoyer of the
dream world. In the deep sleep state there is neither
the doer of actions nor the enjoyer of the world. In
the absence of thoughts, there is no concept of time,
space or duality. Hence, I can not say how long I
slept pr where I was in sleep.

-------------

1. I am looking for comments of members on the
Kartrutva and Bhokrtutva aspects of dreamer.

2. In the dreams do only the impressions of waking
state experiences of this life matter or prior life
experiences are also playing a role ?

3. Are we not enjoying happiness in deep sleep ? Is it
not called Bhaktrutva ?

4. Which other parts of Sruthi elaborate on this
kartrutva and bhoktrutva aspects of Avastha trayi.

Om Namo Narayanaya !!!

Srikrishna



__________________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Yahoo! Calendar - Free online calendar with sync to Outlook(TM).
http://calendar.yahoo.com

