+++
title = "33 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-08-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028409.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028409.html)

Namaste Bhaskar:

After kR^iSWhNaa's antyasa.mskara while trying to escort his family, arjuna could not defend and 
protect kRiShNaa's family and most of his wives went to abhira willingly. This is found in the mausala parva of mahaabhaarata.


Rgds

Dr. Yadu


________________________________
From: Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Tuesday, August 2, 2011 2:58 AM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] What is 'aprAkRta' ?

praNAms
Hare Krishna

One logical flaw I can point out in the above is that if by 'Lord' we mean
Satchitanandaghana, Brahman, then it cannot be/have a body. 

> Yes, and the same satchidAnandaghana parabrahman has been coined as 
sOpAdhika brahman to accommodate the sAdhaka-s who are more particular to 
do upAsana. As far as I remember, somewhere in geeta bhAshya shankara 
says, brahman assumes the form according to the 'iccha' of his devotees 
and in that form only he will do 'anugraha'..is that verse : yo yo yAm 
yAm tanuM bhaktaH shraddhayArchitumicchati?? not sure.

Everyone was
witness to the baby krishna growing up to an adult and an aged one. 
Brahman
has no vikAra-s. The body has. Only that which is in some way or the 
other
connected with prakriti can have modifications of whatever type

> I think krishna stopped growing further from his adult-hood, because, 
sofar I have seen only bAla krishna and adult krishna photo-s & have not 
seen aged krishna with grey hair, curved back, wrinkle skin, walking stick 
krishna..but mahAbhArata says, after the 'death' of krishna, arjuna has 
performed the 'antya saMskAra to krishna's 'pArthiva' shareera :-))

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
