+++
title = "89 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013418.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013418.html)

Namaste.

A STEP BY STEP FIRST EXPOSURE TO ADVAITA 
THROUGH A DIALOGUE OF 1008 ENTRIES.

The following rambling conversation has been composed as an
attempt to bring to the lay reader some truths of advaita,
without venturing into long passages. So a conscious effort
has been made to reduce  each bit of the conversation  to a
single line (with just eight  exceptions). It has turned
out to be a no-holds-barred dialogue, long and continuous. 
  In the modern days of  desire  to learn ‘without tears’,
this perhaps would carry a message  to those of us who,
inspite of their intelligence in everything pertaining to
the world, think of themselves as dummies in advaita.
Incidentally I imposed on myself another restriction,
namely I will not exceed 1008 entries in this conversation.
 And thus it has been a useful ‘nidhidhyAsana’
(Contemplation on what I have learnt) exercise for me. And
one may notice, the whole treatment goes  in slow motion,
step by step. Concepts are brought in,  one step at a time.
I think this is good for a purposeful nidhidhyAsanA,
especially for a beginner on the spiritual path. I
apologise for not breaking it into smaller sections or
chapters, because the continuous flow of thoughts would not
admit breaks.

Instead of crowding your mailboxes I uploaded the matter on
the web for use by all. It will be released in five
instalments.  The first instalment of Entries 1 to 200 can
be seen in:

http://www.geocities.com/profvk/advaitadialoguepage1.html

My PraNAms to all the Great Gurus of the world and the Guru
of Gurus, Shri dakshhiNAmUrti. 

V. Krishnamurthy



