+++
title = "126 Miguel Angel Carrasco"
date = "1998-01-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-January/007894.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-January/007894.html)

On 16 Jan 1998, Gregory Goode wrote:

>Then you probably see that you've already cut the Gordian knot.  It's not
>something you can just sit down one day volitionally and do.  It's Grace,
>and it is a spontaneous arising (or falling away, of the questions) when
>the Absolute is ready for it it to happen.

I^Òd rather say I haven^Òt done anything. Things just get seen clearer. No
one has caused that change. It is in the nature of the appearance to
evolve, automatically. No place for ^ÓDeus ex machina^Ô here. A stage in the
Lila play leads naturally on to the next. There is no previous script, no
blueprint, no foreseen ending, no prompter, no stage manager, not even
actors. Just characters, shallow shadows of shapes on the Screen, some in
one level of evolution, others in higher or lower ones. All affecting and
being affected by the rest, but all with no substance, no entity, no
essence, shere seeming existence. The movie just seems to appear,  evolves
for a while, and comes to an end. Nothing changes at all. Nothing gets
done. Nothing is. Everything just is watched by the One. And all their
reality consists in being watched, in appearing in Consciousness, as parts
of the great Dreamed Show. The whole is but a momentary colouring of the
colourless light. Like the evanescent clouds in the sky. But the Sun does
not get affected in the least, does not intervene. It is just the light
which makes the appearance possible, the field of being, the ground of
consciousness, the One without a second.

Nisargadatta:
You imagine being and doing as identical. It is not so. The mind and the
body move and change and cause other minds and bodies to move and change,
and that is called doing, action. I see that it is in the nature of action
to create further action, like fire that continues by burning. I neither
act nor cause others to act; I am timelessly aware of what is going on.
(398)

