+++
title = "11 Srikrishna Ghadiyaram"
date = "2002-11-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003989.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003989.html)

Hari Om !!

I am considering sending my son who will be completing his 8 th year in Feb
2003, to a Veda Pathasala after his Upanayanam. I am in search of a Veda
Pathasala in India where there is opportunity for modern education. Do any
of you know such places ?

I came across the following web links to a pathasala organised by  Kanchi
Mata in Kilambakkam village near Chennai. Web link references are given
below. But, I do not know any thing about the quality of CBSE school
there. Looks like, the CBSE school is a Sankara vidyalaya. I do not know
how good the facilities are in the CBSE school or even the Veda pathasala.
Obviously these are concerns to me. My son has been in US since he was 2
months. I am concerned that the style and care should not affect his well
being.

http://www.voiceofsankara.com/ponmalar/82000/PATASALA.htm
http://www.chennaionline.com/education/education/veda.asp
http://www.srisankaravidyalaya.planetvidyaschools.com/

My mother tongue is Telugu (though my son does not know enough Telugu,
unfortunately), and this school is in a Tamil area. As such I would prefer
where there is more Telugu, though it is not the first criterion.

Some one told me that the Veda Vidyarthis in the Tirumala Tirupati
Devasthanam (TTD) Vedapathasala are not cared for till 10 AM until the Veda
teacher comes there, and after he leaves after 5 PM. The very young kids of
5 to 7 years are on their own struggling to wash their clothes, and other
cleaning etc. They do not seem to have any other modern education. This is
what I am precisely interested in avoiding.

Do you have knowlege of veda pathasala in Sringeri ?

Do any of you have personal level knowledge of these institutes ? Or would
you have friends and relatives who can give first hand information. I would
highly appreciate any information. The time left for me is very less.

Om Namo Narayanaya !!

Srikrishna

