+++
title = "13 kuntimaddi sadananda"
date = "2002-11-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003996.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003996.html)

--- Srikrishna Ghadiyaram <srikrishna_ghadiyaram at YAHOO.COM> wrote:
> Hari Om !!
>
> I am considering sending my son who will be completing his 8 th
> year in Feb
> 2003, to a Veda Pathasala after his Upanayanam. I am in search of a
> Veda
> Pathasala in India where there is opportunity for modern education.
> Do any
> of you know such places ?


Noble thought indeed.  Chinmaya Mission runs International
residential school -in Coimbattur where swamini Vimalananda teaches.
I am not sure how much of Veda-s they teach. There he may feel
comfortable since his peers are all from different countries. They
provide regular medical checkup with trained teachers who are exposed
to vedanta.

You need to go and personally see these facilities and make sure not
only the educational facilities but health facilites are adequate for
the child. Last thing you want is child not to get sick.

In Anantapur we run a Brahman Hostel where Veda-s are tought all
students.  The children go to regular school. I am not sure if there
is any CEB school that he can get admitted. The progress of all the
children are closely watched by the administrators who are all
retireed teachers and principals.  Telugu being a local language he
has to learn telugu/sanskrit to fit in. It is mostly intended for
meritorius but poor Brahmin students who cannot afford to stay
ourside. If you are interested I can findout.

Hari OM
Sadananda


=====
What you have is His gift to you and what you do with what you have is your gift to Him - Swami Chinmayananda.

__________________________________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Y! Web Hosting - Let the expert host your web site
http://webhosting.yahoo.com/

