+++
title = "237 Venkatesh Murthy"
date = "2012-03-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031221.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031221.html)

Varuna's lesson to Bhrigu

http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/sbr/sbe44/sbe44034.htm

11:6:1:88. He spake, ‘As to those men whom thou

p. 111

sawest in the eastern region being dismembered by men hewing off their
limbs one by one, and saying, "This to thee, this to me!" they were
the trees: when one puts fire-wood from trees on (the fire) he subdues
the trees, and conquers the world of trees.

11:6:1:99. ‘And as to those men whom thou sawest in the southern
region being dismembered by men cutting up their limbs one by one, and
saying, "This to thee, this to me!" they were the cattle; when one
makes offering with milk he subdues the cattle, and conquers the world
of cattle.

11:6:1:1010. ‘And as to those men thou sawest in the western region
who, whilst sitting still, were being eaten by men sitting still, they
were the herbs: when one illumines (the Agnihotra milk) with a straw
1, he subdues the herbs, and conquers the world of herbs.

11:6:1:1111. ‘And as to those men thou sawest in the northern region
who, whilst crying aloud, were being eaten by men crying aloud, they
were the waters: when one pours water to (the Agnihotra milk), he
subdues the waters, and conquers the world of waters.

11:6:1:1212. ‘And as to those two women whom thou sawest, one
beautiful and one over-beautiful,--the beautiful one is Belief: when
one offers the first libation (of the Agnihotra) he subdues Belief,
and conquers Belief; and the over-beautiful one is Unbelief: when one
offers the second libation, he subdues Unbelief, and conquers
Unbelief.

11:6:1:1313. 'And as to the black man with yellow eyes,

p. 112

who was standing between them with a staff in his hand, he was Wrath:
when, having poured water into the spoon, one pours (the libation into
the fire), he subdues Wrath, and conquers Wrath; and, verily,
whosoever, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, thereby conquers
everything, and subdues everything.'

-- 
Regards

-Venkatesh

