+++
title = "126 m w"
date = "2006-05-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016691.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016691.html)

Thanks a lot Vidyasankarji,

                I wasn't expecting any answer to this question of mine after so long. Thanks a lot again. Also, regarding sanskrit grammar, do you have any suggestions, if you have any good book in your mind. Please let me know.
  If anybody else has any suggestions regarding sanskrit grammar book, please let me know!!! Thanks!!

  "Knowledge is like an abysmal well fed by perennial springs."


  PraNAms
  Manish





Vidyasankar Sundaresan <svidyasankar at hotmail.com> wrote:

> Well, I found this verse to be containing nearly all the 
>wisdom and is capable of calming all the questions and answers....
> Karthikji, Can you please check if it is "lokamamuM." Or if you can 
>separate the word as "sandhi viccheda." I couldn't separate it and see the 
>actual meaning. If you are not able to find the source, it's ok. I was just 
>curious.
>

I don't know if this grammar question ever got addressed in this thread, so 
here goes.

lokaM + amuM = that world (dvitIyA vibhakti, accusative case). The root is 
adas = that, which has a very irregular declension. In the masculine, it 
gets transformed to asau (e.g. asau vai tapann apAm Ayatanam) in the 
nominative case up to amushmin (amushminl loke) in the locative case. Please 
refer a good Skt grammar companion for full details.

Regards,
Vidyasankar


---------------------------------
Ring'em or ping'em. Make  PC-to-phone calls as low as 1¢/min with Yahoo! Messenger with Voice.

