+++
title = "286 MC1"
date = "1997-10-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-October/007506.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-October/007506.html)

Does anyone know of inexpensive flights to India -- I plan on traveling some
time in January and staying about a month. THanks

>From  Fri Oct 31 15:36:14 1997
Message-Id: <FRI.31.OCT.1997.153614.0500.>
Date: Fri, 31 Oct 1997 15:36:14 -0500
Reply-To: chandran at tidalwave.net
To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ram Chandran <chandran at TIDALWAVE.NET>
Organization: Home Personal Account
Subject: Re: The point
Comments: To: Advaita List <Advaita-L at tamu.edu>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Govind Rengarajan <govind at ISC.TAMU.EDU> wrote:

On Thu, 30 Oct 1997, Greg Goode wrote:
> What does "Jai Ambe" mean?
>> I think it means "victory to Devi" (ambA is a manifestation
>> of devi or shakti if I am not mistaken).
govind

Namaskar,
        The expression "Jai Ambe," "Jai Maheswara," "Jai Ganesa," etc., are
symbolic expressions of surrender to the "Ishta Devata."  Ishta Devata
represents the family god, which is one of the unique Hindu Traditions.
The doctrine of Ishta Devata can be explained as follows: A family may
choose the god that satisfies the spiritual longing and make that god,
the object of adoration, love and worship. Since each name and form is
symbolic, Ishta Devata represents some aspect or manifestation of
Supreme Reality.  This doctrine helps an individual or a family to
concentrate on and have a special place for one particular manifestation
or form of God.  Hindu tradition has five types of Ishta Devata worship:
Aditya, the Sun God, Ambika, the Mother Goddess in various forms of
Durga, Lakshmi or Sarasvati, Vishnu, the protector God, Ganesa, the
elephant-faced god (the primal god of all worships), and Maheswara or
Siva, the third god in the Trinity.   The list of Ishta Devata also
includes gods who are closely associated to the families of these gods.
        "Jai Ambe" expresses the intensive worship of the Ishta Devata in one's
heart.  This is known as  Ananya Bhakti which  is in fact  intense
monotheism.  It clears the worshiper's mind of the cobwebs of
superstition and gives a healthy direction to the spirit of devotion.
The final stage of Bhakti is Ekaanta Bhakti, the purest form. At this
stage, the seeker loves God with zero expectation back and the seeker
totally surrenders!  The seeker's mind is filled with total devotion and
Love and no space left for desires! This Divine Love negates all worldly
love in the mind of the devotee and the devotee is totally free from
ego!  Meerabhai in the north India and her southern counterpart Andal
has demonstrated Divine Love and attained the Divinity through total
surrender.

Ram Chandran
>From ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU Sat Nov  1 09:33:14 1997
Message-Id: <SAT.1.NOV.1997.093314.0100.ADVAITAL at TAMU.EDU>
Date: Sat, 1 Nov 1997 09:33:14 +0100
Reply-To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Miguel Angel Carrasco <nisargadata at MX3.REDESTB.ES>
Subject: Sending a copy of ASMI
Comments: To: Advaita Mail List <advaita-l at tamu.edu>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Thank you to several members for their interest in receiving my file ASMI
(Nisargadatta's talks in I AM THAT organized systematically).
I am trying to solve some technical problems and I will then soon send the
file to those interested.

