+++
title = "279 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-08-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028701.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028701.html)

Namaste:

This discussion not only confirms but validates the concept
of “Information Theory” from applied mathematics. According to the information
theory, “information
that which is certain in the beginning tends to become uncertain with the
passage of time.” Information theory can be illustrated by looking at the
Pyramids. People who built them had the specific knowledge about constructing
them, but through the passage of time details regarding construction are lost
in the antiquity. 


This principal
has clearly affected languages, knowledge from veda(especially the viniyogaportion) as well as ancient history. This
will continue to escalate (increasing entropy) unless scholars from various
disciplines interact and cross-check pauraaNikaainterpretations in accordance with archaeological and other evidence
from known history of neighboring countries, such as, Iran, Afghanistan region
and China. Ultimately this may help us understand the real utility from our
heritage. 


I see no agreement not just between Dvaita, Madhava and Advatins but even amongst their own sub-sets either.. For crying out loud do Shankaracharya's from four major MaThaa agree with each other? That means this again validates the Information Theory. Original message was understood at the beginning but not it is getting more and more distorted. Probably some realixed this and that is why Vedanta paribhaaSha was penned.


Last week a Swami from Chinmaya Mission while talking on Bhagvat puraaNa in Bomant Texas area conveniently proclaimed "madra desha" as Madras. I do do not know where they get their training but ignorance (Entropy) seems to be escalating exponentially.


Best wishes

Dr. Yadu


##########
NOTE: Information Theory is based on probability theoryand statistics. The most important
quantities of information are entropy, the information in a random variable, and mutual information, the amount of information in common between
two random variables. Practical examples of Information Theory are DSL, MP3.



________________________________
From: V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Sunday, August 21, 2011 6:44 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] apaurusheyatva of veda-s

On Sun, Aug 21, 2011 at 7:17 PM, Raghav Kumar <raghavkumar00 at gmail.com>wrote:

> Namaste
>
>
> But that is not the point I am making. The shruti and smritis make it clear
> that certain clearcut future CONSEQUENCES like birth in a lower yoni will
> accrue as a result of certain niShiddha karmas. My question is - will these
> consequences arise for someone unacquainted with or even ill-disposed twards
> the Veda ? I believe it to be so.. For example, a person who reaches out and
> helps others unselfishly, acccumulates puNya. This puNya will necessary give
> a result sometime either in this or some other birth. This time-delayed
> effect of karma cannot be known without being told so by the smritis. Doing
> a niShiddha (prohibited) action will result in pApa. This result of a given
> karma HAS to arise, says the Veda. (karmaphala is said to be
> "avashyam-bhAvI). This cannot be overridden by any other scritpure or by the
> mere fact of non-belief in shruti/smriti.
>
> The smritis and shruti also give us knowledge of viShesha dharma - certain
> nuances and exceptions to the general principles of sAmA(nya dharma. For
> example, a kshatriya has to kill and fight in a righteous war. Such viShesha
> dharma also permits certain sacrifices involving animals. (BhAShyakAra
> quotes the sUtra - "mA himsyAt tIrthebhyo'anyaH" - abhor violence with
> respect to all beings except in the case of the tIrthAs - permitted locii)
> Now for an adherent of the orthodox Salafi version of the Quran, a Hindu is
> interpreted as being what amounts to a "tIrtha" , an exception (as per their
> belief system), to the general rule to shun violence. So one who regards
> such an interpretation of the Quran to be his "pramANa" will follow it and
> may indulge in violence in order to attain paradise by becoming a "ghAzi".
>
> But will he actually attain paradise in keeping with his own scriptural
> mandate. In my understanding the Veda says NO and so I certainly don't
> think so at all.,
>
>
I am reminded of what prevails closer at home:

Journal of Vaiṣṇava studies: Volume 13, Issues 1-2
<http://books.google.co.in/books?id=R4bXAAAAMAAJ&q=according+to+Madhva+advaitins+will+go+to+hell&dq=according+to+Madhva+advaitins+will+go+to+hell&hl=en&ei=3K9RTqOXGof8mAXJo6HPBg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=2&ved=0CDgQ6AEwAQ>
<http://books.google.co.in/books?id=R4bXAAAAMAAJ&q=according+to+Madhva+advaitins+will+go+to+hell&dq=according+to+Madhva+advaitins+will+go+to+hell&hl=en&ei=3K9RTqOXGof8mAXJo6HPBg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=book-thumbnail&resnum=2&ved=0CDkQ6wEwAQ>
books.*go*ogle.co.in2004 - Snippet view
.In his entire Bhagavat-tatparya-nimaya (*Madhva's* commentary on the
Bhagavata Parana) , for example, *Madhva* *...* says twenty times "those who
hold *Advaitin* views *will go to hell*."


http://www.rift-gears.com/?p=716  (Hari-vAyu stuti)

//Andah tamas is linked to avidya. The following Upanishad quote mentions
the link between andah tamas and avidya.

Ishavasya Upanishad 1.1.9

andham tamah pravisanti ye&8217;vidyamupasate

tato bhuya iva te tamo ya u vidyayam ratah 9

andham tamah = relentless, blinding darkness; pravisanti = enter into,
obtain; ye = those who; avidyam = with incorrect understanding, having
failed to grasp correctly; upasate = worship, meditate upon; tatah = and
then, than that; bhuyah = greater; iva = undoubtedly; te = they, those who;
tamah = darkness; ya = who; u = but; vidyayam = proper knowledge; ratah =
engaged in, devoted to.

Those who worship [Visnu or others] with false understanding enter dense,
unrelenting darkness; to a greater darkness than that go they, who are
merely devoted to the correct understanding (but do not care to criticize
incorrect understanding).

We may say, therefore, that &8220;a great responsibility rests with him who
knows; he is bound to teach others, [else] his lot is even worse than those
of the ignorant.&8221; [SCV11]

Not only is it the case that one must condemn false knowledge in order to
avoid the greater suffering that would ensue if one did not, but one must
also do so because the two things, correct understanding and condemnation of
incorrect understanding, each have their own separate result that one should
seek//

According to Madhvas, Advaitins are the ones who hold the incorrect
knowledge and deserve to be condemned. It is their bounden duty to condemn
Advaita at every opportunity in order to abide by the above quoted Shruti.

Regards,
subrahmanian.v
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
