+++
title = "28 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2020-11-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-November/055822.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-November/055822.html)

A pilgrim, on the way back to his town, halted at a dharmasala. He appeased
his hunger there with the free meal offered to him. Then, desirous of doing
good and acquiring punya, he joined the inmates in serving food to the
pilgrims who had come there. Thereafter, he helped in cleaning up the
place. Before retiring for the night, he engaged in conversation with the
others, expressed his sympathy to those who voiced their personal problems
and also gave them beneficial suggestions. He behaved as if the choultry
was his home and the persons there were his family members. Yet, his mind
was fully at peace and he left the next morning without the least
hesitation or regret. After he returned to his home, a person asked him,
"Where did you spend your last night?", "At the dharmasala," he replied."
"What transpired there? ", asked the relative. "Nothing of consequence. I
ate there, slept and left. That is all."
A married man has many duties and responsibilities and he has to face many
a problem affecting his family. The scriptures and Bhagavatpada graciously
advise him to lead his family life without attachment. He ought to be like
the pilgrim during his stay at the dharmasala. He will then perform his
duties and face family problems effectively and efficiently but without any
mental agitation.
- Jagadguru Sri Abhinava Vidyatirtha Mahaswamigal - Parables of Acharyal.
(Source: Exalting Elucidations, Sri Vidyatheertha Foundation)
