+++
title = "117 Lakshmi Muthuswamy"
date = "2006-05-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016674.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016674.html)

namaskaram Jagan,

Your qurey on Sadhana Chathushtayam is a very interesting
one.

Even to come to this level of thinking is a great blessing.

yes Ashrama Dharma prescribed by the shruti is one of the
factors that help the individual to achieve the moksha
purushartha.

Purushartha nischaya is very important. Much depends on the
individuals attitude. 

shravanam any way takes place in life as long as the
physical organ of hearing and the sense of hearing are
functioning with the mind behind the senses. hearing takes
place all our life. 

But for vedanta shravanam it requires immense effort.
Nischayatmika buddhih finality in thinking.With a zest to
see what vedanta is talking about and giving importance to
nothing else.

I am quoting my teacher "Brahma Vidya is like a jealous
wife"

We need to earn Iswara krupa, Guru krupa, Sruti krupa, atma
krupa and many krupas galore for achieving the sadhana
chatushtayam.

The entire subject matter is all about life and living.
Following the Ashrama Dharma supports in understanding
this.Sva dharma anushtanam. 

Ashtanga yoga is also recommended.

Once one is on the track, the path automatically leads in
the right direction.

Have you come across this book "Tattva Bodhah". This is
like a primer. This book in lucid clear siple language
explains the basic princilpes of vedanta. discusses in
detail the Sadhana chatushtayam. This book is usually
taught before we commence the study of other texts.

My teacher used to say that the content of this book with
theior meanings understood should at the tip` of the
tongue.
Well its yet to happen for me.

For your information the Chinmaya Mission has published
with commentary by Chinmayaji, and Arsha vidya gurukulam
also has published this book.

You can get lectures on cds by Swami Dayanandaji and
Paramarthaji in MP3 cds at Shastra prakashika trust
Chennai. They have website in the same name.

I have been doing shravanam for the last 5 years without a
break but still......there is a long way to go. Its just
not one factor that one finger can be pointed out but very
many.

Well our scriptures say "No problem" It takes janmas to
attain. Its a consolation, no pressures or hurry. We keep
putting in our continuous effort with shraddha. What I
deserve just happens.

om namo Narayanaya
Lakshmi Muthuswamy

__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
Tired of spam?  Yahoo! Mail has the best spam protection around 
http://mail.yahoo.com 

