+++
title = "18 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-10-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-October/015184.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-October/015184.html)

Namaste Vishu-ji

I am reproducing below your further three questions and my
feeble responses:

1. What is the exact mechanism of subtle body (sUkshma
sharira) escaping the
body and taking another body?

VK: The exact mechanism is too much to ask. Some Upanishads
do talk about this, but I am not familiar enough with them
to give you exact reference.

2. How are vasanas stored in subtle body?

VK: G.O.K. (God only knows!)

3. What happens to this subtle body after realization? (of
brahma jnana)

VK: Whatever happens to everything else. First of all I
would change the words "after realization" to "on
realization".  On realization there is only Brahman. I
could have added 'everywhere' but that would connote the
existence of 'space' as if it were different from Brahman.
So the only thing you could posit is 'Brahman is'.  So
there is no body, no subtle body, no anything!

Vishu-ji, I may appear to you as not very helpful in
responding to your questions, but you are asking questions
which can be answered only by Self-Realized Sages -- if at
all  they choose to answer!

PraNAms to all seekers of Truth.
profvk


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

Latest on my website:  Shrimad Bhagavatam and advaita bhakti. Introduction. Chatushloki Bhagavatam. Vidura and Maitreya. Kapila Gita.
Dhruva charitam. JaDabharata, Ajamila Stories. Prahlada Charitram.

http://www.geocities.com/profvk/VK2/Bhagavatam_Introduction.html

and succeeding pages.

