+++
title = "61 N.Seshan"
date = "2003-11-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-November/012340.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-November/012340.html)

i think here the ground becomes a bit tricky. The gradation among
jivanmuktas is found in the yoga vasistha possibly ,
neither sankara nor the immediate sisciples mention any such thing, I do not
know any ref in the Gaudapada karika, is there
sruti support for the same? if we argue that bcos life is there, the person
eats bcos he / she is alive, should it be taken that
there is a desire for living?
I think the potter's wheel example for the prarabdha remaining in a person's
life is better, that the inertial force
will tend to die out on its own and no attention need be paid to it. What
are we trying to prove here? IF a jivan mukta smokes,
let him that is it...
RGds/Seshan

 Hi Tahir,

Sri Ramkarishna was very clear that anyone who is a jivanmukta and still
existing in the bodily form did have a desire. So they will ensure that they
do the activities essential for them to fulfill the desire. He used to say
that he had the desire to enjoy the Mother's Maya and hence he had to pay
some amount of attention to his body. He also said the Shankara kept the
desire of teaching humanity in order to be able to write such volumes on
Vedanta.

Vedanta has laid down gradations even among Jivanmuktas like Brahmavid etc.
in order to explain this.

Regards,
Swaminathan


>From: "Tahir Nazir" <tnazir at energy.com.au>
>Reply-To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
><advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
><advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] jivanmukti
>Date: Mon, 10 Nov 2003 15:46:59 +1100
>
> > Well the single distinguishing characteristic of a jivanamukta is they
>are
> > free.  So if they seem to be expressing non-free behaviour (like
>addiction
> > in your example) then they are probably not jivanamuktas.
>
>Freedom is a key to being a jivanmukti. One could then say that person
>must be free from desire, from hunger, etc. But these realised beings do
>eat food, why do they consume food if there is no desire? If one can eat
>food then surely one can smoke 20 cigarettes a day and still be free.
>
>Regards,
>Tahir
>
>want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
>http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>Need assistance? Contact:
>listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

_________________________________________________________________
Get head-hunted by 10,000 recruiters. http://go.msnserver.com/IN/35984.asp
Post your CV on naukri.com today.


------------------------------

Message: 6
Date: Mon, 10 Nov 2003 16:16:04 +0800
 > From: Tahir Nazir [SMTP:tnazir at energy.com.au]
> Sent: Monday, November 10, 2003 12:47 PM
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] jivanmukti
>
> > Well the single distinguishing characteristic of a jivanamukta is they
> are
> > free.  So if they seem to be expressing non-free behaviour (like
> addiction
> > in your example) then they are probably not jivanamuktas.
>
> Freedom is a key to being a jivanmukti. One could then say that person
> must be free from desire, from hunger, etc. But these realised beings do
> eat food, why do they consume food if there is no desire? If one can eat
> food then surely one can smoke 20 cigarettes a day and still be free.
>
> Regards,
> Tahir
>
 From: Mar?a Dickson<mad574 at yahoo.com.ar>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] jivanmukti
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <20031110132422.61061.qmail at web12803.mail.yahoo.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1

I think that eating is necessary to keep alive. So, a
jivamukti, still alive, HAS to eat. But smoke is not
necessary to mantain the life, so I don't think that
they are equal.
Hari Om Tat Sat
Maria



