+++
title = "41 S Jayanarayanan"
date = "2004-09-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-September/013473.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-September/013473.html)

This is not specifically advaita VedAnta, but is indeed connected to
the tradition in general. The article reports on Swami Gyananand
Saraswati's paper that comes to the conclusion that Lord Krishna lived
for 125 years. 
-Kartik

http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/844211.cms

Lord Krishna lived for 125 years

TIMES NEWS NETWORK[ WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 08, 2004 10:07:31 PM ]

RAJKOT: It's now official. The god who took 'avatar' to cleanse the
world of sin, gave us the Gita and promised to return whenever evil
outweighs the good, had lived 125 years on this earth, much longer than
the oldest living man, Fred Hale, who according to the Guinness Book of
World Records , is 113! 

It was on February 18, 3102 BC that Krishna breathed his last on the
banks of river Hiran in Prabhas Patan, after living 125 years seven
months and six days. He died at 14:27:30 hours, according to a paper
presented at a convention that began at Prabhas Patan, close to
Somnath, on Tuesday as the country celebrated Krishna's birth. 

"The finding is based on a number of hints in ancient scriptures.
Certain dates related to his life taken from the scriptures were then
fed into a software along with Krishna's characteristic traits for an
astrological calculation to prepare his 'kundli,'" Swami Gyananand
Saraswati, chairperson of the Varanasi-based Adi Jagatguru
Shankaracharya Sodh Sansthan told TNN after presenting the paper at the
gathering of scholars. 

"While the 'Vishnu Puran' and the 'Bhagvad Gita' mention that Krishna
'left' Dwarka 36 years after the battle of Mahabharata and was not seen
anymore, the 'Matsya Purana' mentions that he was 89 years old when the
battle was fought. Then again, the 'Mahabharata' mentions that the
Kalyug began the day Krishna 'left' and this year is the 5,106th year
of the Kalyug. All these indicators helped us get to the date," said
Saraswati. 

The research was conducted through three months after the Somnath Trust
made a formal request. 

The paper was presented in the presence of a host of scholars including
Bhrighu Samhita expert and member of Institute of Future Forecasting
Nandkishore Purohit and National Astrological Parishad president Arun
Bansal. The paper was accepted by those present at the convention. 

And, armed with this paper, the trust has now decided to observe for
the first time Krishna's death anniversary on April 9, 2005 (the day
falls on the first day of the month of Chaitra in the Indian calendar,
when Krishna is claimed to have died). 

"Somnath Trust president Keshubhai Patel declared that celebration of
Krishna's death will be an annual affair now. We will celebrate the
first day of Chaitra every year as Krishna's death anniversary," said
secretary of the trust Ashok Sharma. 



_______________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Express yourself with Y! Messenger! Free. Download now. 
http://messenger.yahoo.com

