+++
title = "121 Srivathsa Rao"
date = "2015-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-March/038322.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-March/038322.html)

you can see 72 sects clearly in sarva dharshana sangraha of vidhyaranya.

Proof for my messege is shakara vijaya of vidhyaranya

On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 5:06 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com> wrote:

> Sir,
>
> For proof for my messege is shankara vijaya.
> The some sects among 72 sects are
> ganapatha,soura,shaktha,samkhya,vaisheshika,12 shaiva sects,vaishnava,yoga
> ,purva mimansa,bhaskara matha,nyaya etc.....
>
> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 2:47 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
> wrote:
>
>> Advaita is about brahman (Sat-chit-ananda) ,which is nirvikaara....So,
>> advaita will never be rotten ,but your way of thinking and these new sects
>> may get rotten one day.....let us wait for new shankaracharya....
>>
>> I am not saying knowledge of brahman is related to bhakthi and virakthi
>> or brahma jgnana is needed to bhakthi or virakthi....what I am saying is
>> one may be great bhaktha and viraktha that doesnot mean that he is brahma
>> jgnani.......
>> So,one cannot say a sect of vaidhika philosophy is correct as there are
>> many bhakthas and virakthas are there in that vaidika philosophy....
>>
>> thats all...
>>
>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 2:28 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
>> wrote:
>>
>>> Sir,
>>>     What I am saying is one who has virakthi and bhakthi does't mean
>>> that he has right knowldge of brahman (Sat-chit-Ananda)
>>> So,there may be many virathas and bhkthas in other sects that doesnot
>>> mean that that sects are correct
>>>
>>> there are many brahmins when they see other sect mathas ,other sect men
>>> or other sect gets in justice they feel happy because of jealous about
>>> other sects.....these type of problem will not be there and there will be
>>> unity among brahmins if they come under single sidhanta
>>>
>>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 1:50 PM, श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
>>> lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:
>>>
>>>>
>>>>
>>>>
>>>> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>>>>
>>>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 12:54 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
>>>> wrote:
>>>>
>>>>> Sir ,
>>>>>
>>>>> You have said that there are noble souls in other sects not only in
>>>>> advaita...as we can see many virakhtas ,bakthas in other sects..
>>>>>
>>>>> One is viraktha or a great bhaktha doesn't mean that his knowledge is
>>>>> correct
>>>>>
>>>>
>>>> Correct knowledge of what ? Veda-s?
>>>> Sorry, it is not needed for virakti and bhakti.
>>>> virakti is generated from knowing bad qualities of things and bhakti
>>>> is generated by knowing good qualities of Ishvara. Where does veda or AtmA
>>>> comes?
>>>>
>>>> if so,there are many jaina ,boudha virakthas what you say for
>>>>> them...they are avaidika matha .. ..will you say they are correct and vedas
>>>>> are wrong?
>>>>>
>>>>
>>>> Why are you making virakti is equal to knowledge of veda ?
>>>> There is no need of such knowledge for virakti, bhakti.
>>>> 
>>>>
>>>>
>>>>>
>>>>> You can't say so because this vedas or athma jgnana
>>>>>  
>>>>> is beyond them as vedas  are apourusheya....which is beyond human
>>>>> thinking capacity....
>>>>>
>>>>
>>>> Here I stop reading.
>>>> I think you need some serious help. You are living in some other world
>>>> where words don't reach.
>>>> 
>>>>
>>>>
>>>>>
>>>>> So,we have learn vidhya  from a lineage of guru parampara,not from so
>>>>> intellectual brilliant ,there was no bhudhism before bhudha or jaininsm
>>>>> before mahaveera ,maadhva before madhva and vishistadvaita before
>>>>> ramanuja....
>>>>>
>>>>> And even bhudha till his young din't even knew what is
>>>>> death....so,there was no clue to him of what is sathama dharma asdone by
>>>>>  his father....
>>>>>
>>>>> But there was advaita before shankaracharya...
>>>>>
>>>>> which makes us to think off...
>>>>>
>>>>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 12:40 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
>>>>> wrote:
>>>>>
>>>>>> Sir,
>>>>>>
>>>>>>  I am not telling to kill chatur varnashrama,to tell in better
>>>>>> worlds,I want to unite brahmins....In brahmins there are three
>>>>>> sects...smarthas ,madhvas and sri vaishnavas...I want to bring all of them
>>>>>> under single platform......
>>>>>>
>>>>>> Brahmins are the backbone of sanathana dharma ,if we unite them the
>>>>>> unity among hindus will automatically comes....
>>>>>>
>>>>>> At present there is no unity among brahmins ,to bring unity among
>>>>>> brahmins there is need to bring them under single platform..
>>>>>> As unity among different sects will be always not as good as unity
>>>>>> among single sect as homogeneous unity will always better than
>>>>>> heterogeneous unity...
>>>>>>
>>>>>> Now when there is any injustice to brahmins there comes heterogeneous
>>>>>> unity ,but after a while this unity will die soon , as it is
>>>>>> heterogeneous...but homogeneous  unity is not like that it lasts till end...
>>>>>>
>>>>>> Also some brahmins think if there is injustice to other sect or other
>>>>>> sect brahmin ,it is good let it happen...this type of jealous will die
>>>>>> ...if there is single dharma among brahmins
>>>>>>
>>>>>> You have asked by killing dvaita and vishistadvaita weather we are
>>>>>> not killing creativity of hindu religion...for that my answer is..this
>>>>>> newly formed religions are not there in shankaracharya's time,,these are
>>>>>> the product of the new acharya's thinking way and these religion looks so
>>>>>> childish....
>>>>>>
>>>>>> This athma's concept is not up to some one's thinking capacity that
>>>>>> is why vedas are considered as apourusheya...that is why vedas and its
>>>>>> hidden meanings has to be learnt from good lineage of guru paramapara.....
>>>>>>
>>>>>> This athman's concept is beyond this bhudhi as said by upanishads
>>>>>> only ...so ,we have to learn it from a proper guruparampara only not from
>>>>>> some intellectual brilliant...which will be mostly wrong..as we can easily
>>>>>> see in dvaita and vishistadvaita
>>>>>>
>>>>>> Shakara's advaita has a lineage from goudapadacharya who was a
>>>>>> advaithi,but dvaita was not there before madhva,his teacher achutha preksha
>>>>>> was aadvaithi...similarly ramauja's guru was aadvaithi......
>>>>>>
>>>>>> Always old is gold.....
>>>>>>
>>>>>>
>>>>>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 11:47 AM, V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <
>>>>>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>>>>
>>>>>>> On Sun, Mar 29, 2015 at 11:44 PM, Santosh Rao via Advaita-l <
>>>>>>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> > NamaskR,
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > What were these 72 sects? it is my understanding that
>>>>>>> sankaracharyas
>>>>>>> > philosophical opponents were mainly buddhists, jains, and
>>>>>>> mimamsikas not
>>>>>>> > muslims. Is this incorrect?
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> In this URL containing the Anandagiriya Shankara vijaya, on pdf p.12
>>>>>>> onwards you can see a list of schools that are refuted. One can
>>>>>>> count at
>>>>>>> the most 50 there.
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > What is the answer to the assertion that advaita vedanta is a
>>>>>>> philosophical
>>>>>>> > "compromise" with buddhism? Does this claim hold water?
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> You can read a six-part series of articles on the topic: Buddhism,
>>>>>>> Advaita
>>>>>>> and Dvaita published in this forum.  For the first part here is the
>>>>>>> URL:
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-May/027302.html
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> You can locate the other parts too by suitably searching.
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> regards
>>>>>>> subrahmanian.v
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> > This is just myth.
>>>>>>> > 'Removed 72 sects'?? From where??
>>>>>>> > All minds?? Even most loyal of those sects?? Even from future
>>>>>>> minds??
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > I don't think that just because there is a philosophy known as
>>>>>>> Vedanta,
>>>>>>> > people will not convert. If it were true no one would have
>>>>>>> converted at any
>>>>>>> > time.
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > It's man who decides what he wants to follow, right or wrong. Who
>>>>>>> gives
>>>>>>> > even a single thought to validity of philosophy and arguments?
>>>>>>> Only a few.
>>>>>>> > So, only they don't convert because there is a philosophy and they
>>>>>>> can
>>>>>>> > understand that. It's not applicable to masses.
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > Debates are always going on among sects mentioned by you. But, it
>>>>>>> is not to
>>>>>>> > convert essentially.
>>>>>>> > The argument which you think correct is flawed in other's view.
>>>>>>> So, it
>>>>>>> > didn't prove your philosophy correct to him. So, he doesn't leave
>>>>>>> his sect.
>>>>>>> > Another thing, most debates are to show that they have studied
>>>>>>> their
>>>>>>> > respective works and retain that. Some debates are to win prizes.
>>>>>>> So, the
>>>>>>> > result you are expecting can't come from those debates.
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > Do you think that mAdhva-s and shrI-vaiShNava-s are avaidika in
>>>>>>> every
>>>>>>> > sense?
>>>>>>> > No, it is not like that. They follow veda-s. They are already in
>>>>>>> home. And,
>>>>>>> > what veda-s want to say is debatable.
>>>>>>> > So, stop being biased and forcing your thoughts on others.
>>>>>>> > On Mar 29, 2015 7:03 PM, "Srivathsa Rao via Advaita-l" <
>>>>>>> > advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > > Before 1200 years there came shankaracharya  who removed 72
>>>>>>> sects in
>>>>>>> > > ancient sathana dharma and brought them under a single platform
>>>>>>> of
>>>>>>> > advaita
>>>>>>> > > vedanta,that is why ancient sanathana dharma is still present in
>>>>>>> india
>>>>>>> > > otherwise we would have been muslim by now.
>>>>>>> > >
>>>>>>> > > The present day science even support advaita vedanta.Now my
>>>>>>> point is why
>>>>>>> > > can't some learned scholars can bring back madhvas and
>>>>>>> srivishnavas and
>>>>>>> > > newly formed mathas under advaita vedanta by proper debate under
>>>>>>> > upanishad.
>>>>>>> > >
>>>>>>> > > This will even support Rss 's Ghar Vapsi Right?
>>>>>>> > > _______________________________________________
>>>>>>> > > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>>>>> > > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>>>>> > >
>>>>>>> > > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>>>>> > > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>>>>> > >
>>>>>>> > > For assistance, contact:
>>>>>>> > > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>>>>> > >
>>>>>>> > _______________________________________________
>>>>>>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>>>>> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>>>>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > For assistance, contact:
>>>>>>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>>>>> > _______________________________________________
>>>>>>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>>>>> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>>>>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> > For assistance, contact:
>>>>>>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>>>>> >
>>>>>>> _______________________________________________
>>>>>>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>>>>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>>>>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>> For assistance, contact:
>>>>>>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>>>>>
>>>>>>
>>>>>>
>>>>>
>>>>
>>>
>>
>
