+++
title = "122 Sunil Bhattacharjya"
date = "2015-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-March/038327.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-March/038327.html)

Namaste,
Shri Srivathsa Rao's concern as to why there should so many sects, is understandable, but the answer to this is not simple. "HE" wanted to be many and despite being many "HE" is still "HE" only but we the many, though not different from "HIM", do not realise this truth. The Advaitin may consider this truth to be elementary or basic, but that is not so for the non-advaitins. The non-advaitins are satisfied with the "Apara-vidya" as taught to them by their great gurus. Though the Advaita-vada is ancient and is based on Vedanta, it was Adi Shankara's paramguru Gaudapadacharya who renewed the efforts on teaching the Advaita-vada. Adi Shankaracharya's date is embroiled in controversy. While some think Adi Shankaracharya lived in the 8th century CE, while others think that he lived 13 centuries earlier. Hopefully the scholars would make renewed efforts to be able to come to an agreement on the date of Adi Shankaracharya.

Lord Buddha taught Advaya-vada some 13 centuries before Adi Shankaracharya. Some find similarity between Advaya-vada of Lord Buddha and Advaita-vada of Adi Shankara, while others do not. Lord Buddha wanted people to get out of the cycle of birth and death and urged the people to understand the essence of the Vedas and desist from excessive ritualism including animal sacrifice, as was practised in his time in the name of the Veda. Further the fact also remains that after the gap of the 13 centuries, i.e., during the time of Adi Shankara, the pristine thoughts of Lord Buddha got metamorphosed due to the various interpretations brought in by the later-day Buddhist scholars. This is a separate subject by itself and I shall not go more into this. 

As regards the fond thought of the possibility of all becoming Advaitin, Let us the advaitins do our whatever is possible and leave the rest to Lord Krishna. I just want to remind you that the following verse, which has been used by Gaudapadacharya actually told by Lord Krishna (as versified by Vedavyasa) in the original Bhagavad Gita and unfortunately the post-Shankara Acharyas ignored this verse completely, probably thinking that to be a composition of Gaudapadacharya. The verse is as follows:
आदावन्ते च यन्नास्ति वर्तमानेऽपि तत्तथा ।
वितथैः सदृशाः सन्तोऽवितथा इव लक्षिताः ॥

Had they known the fact, the situation could have been different. 

Regards,Sunil KB





     On Monday, March 30, 2015 1:58 AM, Srivathsa Rao via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:


 Sir,
  What I am saying is one who has virakthi and bhakthi does't mean that
he has right knowldge of brahman (Sat-chit-Ananda)
So,there may be many virathas and bhkthas in other sects that doesnot mean
that that sects are correct

there are many brahmins when they see other sect mathas ,other sect men or
other sect gets in justice they feel happy because of jealous about other
sects.....these type of problem will not be there and there will be unity
among brahmins if they come under single sidhanta

On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 1:50 PM, श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:

>
>
>
> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>
> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 12:54 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
> wrote:
>
>> Sir ,
>>
>> You have said that there are noble souls in other sects not only in
>> advaita...as we can see many virakhtas ,bakthas in other sects..
>>
>> One is viraktha or a great bhaktha doesn't mean that his knowledge is
>> correct
>>
>
> ​Correct knowledge of what ? Veda-s?
> Sorry, it is not needed for virakti and bhakti.
> virakti is ​generated from knowing bad qualities of things and bhakti is
> generated by knowing good qualities of Ishvara. Where does veda or AtmA
> comes?
>
> if so,there are many jaina ,boudha virakthas what you say for them...they
>> are avaidika matha .. ..will you say they are correct and vedas are wrong?
>>
>
> ​Why are you making virakti is equal to knowledge of veda ?
> There is no need of such knowledge for virakti, bhakti.
> ​
>
>
>>
>> You can't say so because this vedas or athma jgnana
>> ​ ​
>> is beyond them as vedas are apourusheya....which is beyond human
>> thinking capacity....
>>
>
> ​Here I stop reading.
> I think you need some serious help. You are living in some other world
> where words don't reach.
> ​
>
>
>>
>> So,we have learn vidhya from a lineage of guru parampara,not from so
>> intellectual brilliant ,there was no bhudhism before bhudha or jaininsm
>> before mahaveera ,maadhva before madhva and vishistadvaita before
>> ramanuja....
>>
>> And even bhudha till his young din't even knew what is death....so,there
>> was no clue to him of what is sathama dharma asdone by his father....
>>
>> But there was advaita before shankaracharya...
>>
>> which makes us to think off...
>>
>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 12:40 PM, Srivathsa Rao <vathsa108 at gmail.com>
>> wrote:
>>
>>> Sir,
>>>
>>> I am not telling to kill chatur varnashrama,to tell in better worlds,I
>>> want to unite brahmins....In brahmins there are three sects...smarthas
>>> ,madhvas and sri vaishnavas...I want to bring all of them under single
>>> platform......
>>>
>>> Brahmins are the backbone of sanathana dharma ,if we unite them the
>>> unity among hindus will automatically comes....
>>>
>>> At present there is no unity among brahmins ,to bring unity among
>>> brahmins there is need to bring them under single platform..
>>> As unity among different sects will be always not as good as unity among
>>> single sect as homogeneous unity will always better than heterogeneous
>>> unity...
>>>
>>> Now when there is any injustice to brahmins there comes heterogeneous
>>> unity ,but after a while this unity will die soon , as it is
>>> heterogeneous...but homogeneous unity is not like that it lasts till end...
>>>
>>> Also some brahmins think if there is injustice to other sect or other
>>> sect brahmin ,it is good let it happen...this type of jealous will die
>>> ...if there is single dharma among brahmins
>>>
>>> You have asked by killing dvaita and vishistadvaita weather we are not
>>> killing creativity of hindu religion...for that my answer is..this newly
>>> formed religions are not there in shankaracharya's time,,these are the
>>> product of the new acharya's thinking way and these religion looks so
>>> childish....
>>>
>>> This athma's concept is not up to some one's thinking capacity that is
>>> why vedas are considered as apourusheya...that is why vedas and its hidden
>>> meanings has to be learnt from good lineage of guru paramapara.....
>>>
>>> This athman's concept is beyond this bhudhi as said by upanishads only
>>> ...so ,we have to learn it from a proper guruparampara only not from some
>>> intellectual brilliant...which will be mostly wrong..as we can easily see
>>> in dvaita and vishistadvaita
>>>
>>> Shakara's advaita has a lineage from goudapadacharya who was a
>>> advaithi,but dvaita was not there before madhva,his teacher achutha preksha
>>> was aadvaithi...similarly ramauja's guru was aadvaithi......
>>>
>>> Always old is gold.....
>>>
>>>
>>> On Mon, Mar 30, 2015 at 11:47 AM, V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <
>>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>
>>>> On Sun, Mar 29, 2015 at 11:44 PM, Santosh Rao via Advaita-l <
>>>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>>
>>>> > NamaskR,
>>>> >
>>>> > What were these 72 sects? it is my understanding that sankaracharyas
>>>> > philosophical opponents were mainly buddhists, jains, and mimamsikas
>>>> not
>>>> > muslims. Is this incorrect?
>>>> >
>>>>
>>>> In this URL containing the Anandagiriya Shankara vijaya, on pdf p.12
>>>> onwards you can see a list of schools that are refuted. One can count at
>>>> the most 50 there.
>>>>
>>>> >
>>>> > What is the answer to the assertion that advaita vedanta is a
>>>> philosophical
>>>> > "compromise" with buddhism? Does this claim hold water?
>>>> >
>>>>
>>>> You can read a six-part series of articles on the topic: Buddhism,
>>>> Advaita
>>>> and Dvaita published in this forum. For the first part here is the URL:
>>>>
>>>> http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-May/027302.html
>>>>
>>>> You can locate the other parts too by suitably searching.
>>>>
>>>> regards
>>>> subrahmanian.v
>>>>
>>>>
>>>> > This is just myth.
>>>> > 'Removed 72 sects'?? From where??
>>>> > All minds?? Even most loyal of those sects?? Even from future minds??
>>>> >
>>>> > I don't think that just because there is a philosophy known as
>>>> Vedanta,
>>>> > people will not convert. If it were true no one would have converted
>>>> at any
>>>> > time.
>>>> >
>>>> > It's man who decides what he wants to follow, right or wrong. Who
>>>> gives
>>>> > even a single thought to validity of philosophy and arguments? Only a
>>>> few.
>>>> > So, only they don't convert because there is a philosophy and they can
>>>> > understand that. It's not applicable to masses.
>>>> >
>>>> > Debates are always going on among sects mentioned by you. But, it is
>>>> not to
>>>> > convert essentially.
>>>> > The argument which you think correct is flawed in other's view. So, it
>>>> > didn't prove your philosophy correct to him. So, he doesn't leave his
>>>> sect.
>>>> > Another thing, most debates are to show that they have studied their
>>>> > respective works and retain that. Some debates are to win prizes. So,
>>>> the
>>>> > result you are expecting can't come from those debates.
>>>> >
>>>> > Do you think that mAdhva-s and shrI-vaiShNava-s are avaidika in every
>>>> > sense?
>>>> > No, it is not like that. They follow veda-s. They are already in
>>>> home. And,
>>>> > what veda-s want to say is debatable.
>>>> > So, stop being biased and forcing your thoughts on others.
>>>> > On Mar 29, 2015 7:03 PM, "Srivathsa Rao via Advaita-l" <
>>>> > advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>>> >
>>>> > > Before 1200 years there came shankaracharya who removed 72 sects in
>>>> > > ancient sathana dharma and brought them under a single platform of
>>>> > advaita
>>>> > > vedanta,that is why ancient sanathana dharma is still present in
>>>> india
>>>> > > otherwise we would have been muslim by now.
>>>> > >
>>>> > > The present day science even support advaita vedanta.Now my point
>>>> is why
>>>> > > can't some learned scholars can bring back madhvas and srivishnavas
>>>> and
>>>> > > newly formed mathas under advaita vedanta by proper debate under
>>>> > upanishad.
>>>> > >
>>>> > > This will even support Rss 's Ghar Vapsi Right?
>>>> > > _______________________________________________
>>>> > > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>> > > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>> > >
>>>> > > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>> > > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>> > >
>>>> > > For assistance, contact:
>>>> > > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>> > >
>>>> > _______________________________________________
>>>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>> >
>>>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>> >
>>>> > For assistance, contact:
>>>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>> > _______________________________________________
>>>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>> >
>>>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>> >
>>>> > For assistance, contact:
>>>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>> >
>>>> _______________________________________________
>>>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>>>
>>>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>>>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>>>
>>>> For assistance, contact:
>>>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>>>
>>>
>>>
>>
>
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



