+++
title = "85 Keshava Mahadeva"
date = "2019-06-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-June/052559.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-June/052559.html)

Great message.

Another highlight is that Krishna and Arjuna together go again to get the
Maha Pashupatastra since Arjuna would have forgotten the mantras. It comes
in Drona Parva. There Krishna and Arjuna recite Shata Rudram to get the aha
Pashupatastra weapon. Below are the links.

https://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/m07/m07077.htm

https://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/m07/m07078.htm

*PARAMA SHIVA AS PARA BRAHMA:*

Beholding him, Vasudeva of righteous soul, with Partha, touched the earth
with his head, uttering the eternal words of the Veda. And Krishna adored,
with speech, mind, understanding, and acts, that God who is the first
source of the universe, himself uncreate, the supreme lord of unfading
glory: who is the highest cause of the mind, who is space and the wind, who
is the cause of all the luminous bodies (in the firmament), who is the
creator of the rain, and the supreme, primordial substance of the earth,
who is the object of adoration, with the gods, the Danavas, the Yakshas,
and human beings; who is the supreme Brahma that is seen by Yogins and the
refuge of those acquainted with Shastras, who is the creator of all mobile
and immobile creatures, and their destroyer also; who is the Wrath that
burns everything at the end of the Yuga; who is the supreme soul

*PURUSHA SUKTAM VERSES FOR PARAMA SHIVA SUNG BY KRISHNA AND ARJUNA:*

We bow to thee that hast a thousand heads, to thee that hast a thousand
arms, to thee that art called Death! To thee that hast a thousand eyes, a
thousand legs.

The same has been elucidated in Padma Purana where Janaka Maharaja sings
Purusha Suktam and Shata Rudram to please Lord Shiva, Suta Samhita, Vayu
Purana, Kurma Purana, etc. where Purusha Suktam is a hymn for Lord Shiva.

*KRISHNA AND ARJUNA SINGING SHATA RUDRAM FOR PARAMA SHIVA:*

Then Krishna and Partha having touched water, joined their hands, and
approached those snakes, having bowed unto the god having the bull for his
mark. And as they approached the snakes, conversant as they were with the
Vedas, they uttered the hundred stanzas of the Veda, to the praise of
Rudra, bowing the while with their sincere souls unto Bhava of immeasurable
power.
