+++
title = "62 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "2006-10-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017574.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017574.html)


It certainly was not my intention to start a controversy with this posting 
of mine. As Sri Siva Senani pointed out, I very specifically mentioned that 
at an individual level, one has to be ready to apply all my listed 
principles to one's own favorite institutions also. Rest assured that I have 
applied these criteria to the Sringeri matha publications for my own 
personal satisfaction. Please also note that I emphasized that you can at 
best hope to achieve a personal sense of closure on these issues, which may 
or may not be satisfying to all.

As a matter of fact, I do not particularly care whether an institution is 
100 years old or 1000 years old. For example, Ramanasramam is very recent, 
but as an institution that grew around and strives to be true to Ramana 
Maharishi, it deserves the highest respect. On the other hand, I don't think 
I am prepared to give the same respect to all those self-appointed gurus 
today who cite Ramana's name in an effort to gain some legitimacy.

I have no wish to continue this discussion further, but for whatever it is 
worth, I have indeed read all of W R Antarkar's articles published in 
various journals and have cited and discussed them in my paper comparing the 
various Sankaravijaya texts (International Journal of Hindu Studies, Vol 4, 
No 2, Aug 2000). I also have no wish to hide behind my perceived erudition 
to ward off criticism. I know full well the limitations of mere book 
learning, and I will be the first to admit it if I have been wrong about 
something in the past.

Regards,
Vidyasankar

_________________________________________________________________
Be seen and heard with Windows Live Messenger and Microsoft LifeCams 
http://clk.atdmt.com/MSN/go/msnnkwme0020000001msn/direct/01/?href=http://www.microsoft.com/hardware/digitalcommunication/default.mspx?locale=en-us&source=hmtagline


