+++
title = "04 D.V.N.Sarma"
date = "2003-01-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-January/004260.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-January/004260.html)

On 4 Jan 2003 at 12:19, Ravi  wrote:


> On Thu, 2 Jan 2003 16:40:47 -0500, Jaldhar H. Vyas
> <jaldhar at BRAINCELLS.COM> wrote:
>
> >On Mon, 30 Dec 2002, Vijay Naik wrote:
> >
> >> What is the meaning of Venkat?
> >>
> >
> >It refers to His curly hair.
> >
> >--
>
> I am not sure if the above is correct. The two standard explanations I
> have heard are:
>
> 1. vEm + kaTa + iishvara
>
> This is a part Tamil and part Sanskrit word. vEm in Tamil means dry or hot
> and kaTam means forest. The hills are called vEnkaTam because of the type
> of dry forest that dominates the mountains. Hence, Lord situated on the
> hills is known as vEnkaTEshvara. The hill itself is called as
> thiruvEnkaTam, vEnkaTaachala, vEnkaTaadri, etc. And he is referred to as
> vEnkaTaachala nilayaa, shrii vEnkaTaa nivaasaa ( see suprabhaatam shrii
> vEnkaTa nivaasaaya shriinivaasaaya mangaLam).  In this explanation the
> Lord gets the name after the location. It should be noted that thiruppathi
> is a traditional Tamil Land, even though it is in Andhra Pradesh in the
> modern independent India; and vEnkaTa is a *tamil* word.
>
>

I remember that kADu is the tamil word for forest.
I did not find the meaning dry for the word vEM in the
small tamil dictionary (visvanAtha piLLai) I have.

Sarma.
> 2. vem + kaTa + iishvara
>
> This is a pure sanskrit form. Sanskrit has only one "e" (which is same as
> Tamil "E"). vem means sin, kaTa is to destroy. And shrii venkaTeshvara is
> one who destroys the sins of his devotees. If you search bhakti-list, you
> will find a sanskrit definition of this meaning. In this case, the hill
> gets its name after the lord.
>
> He also shows his hand at knee level denoting that he will destroy the
> sins of the devotees and make the  deep samsara saagara as a shallow as
> knee deep water to cross over.
>
>
> My 2c.
>
> ravi at ambaa.org
>
> ------------------------------
>
> End of ADVAITA-L Digest - 3 Jan 2003 to 5 Jan 2003 (#2003-3)
> ************************************************************
>

