+++
title = "191 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "2007-05-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-May/018902.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-May/018902.html)


I am quite disheartened to see discussions on this list degenerating into 
noise and chaos. In my capacity as moderator of this list, I am calling upon 
all participants on the threads related to Swami Saccidanandendra 
Sarasvati's writings to:

1. Exercise self-restraint - to this end, we recommend a maximum of two 
mails per day per person. Unless this request is honored for the next month 
by all, one of us moderators will have to put specific list members on 
active moderation mode, i.e. your posts will be held back for approval by 
one of the moderators. Of course, this only addresses quantity. We reserve 
the right to evaluate the average quality of posts and take similar action 
whenever necessary.

2. Give the other person the benefit of the doubt, whenever possible. I am 
going to mention specific names in public here; my apologies in advance for 
any hurt sentiments.

For example, Anand, Bhaskar's use of honorifics seems stylistic; he has been 
using these for a long time, so I don't interpret it as being meant in any 
other way in the recent past. On the other hand, Bhaskar, you must surely 
see that what you write is capable of being interpreted in a way that you 
may not have intended. It is a function of how you write. Also, surely, it 
was not necessary to immediately respond with a caustic proverb and with 
comments about people being frustrated. Those of us who have been on this 
list since its inception know that the relative paucity of contribution to 
these discussions from Anand Hudli is out of choice, not out of inability. 
Finally, Rama, please tone down your posts. The points that you want to make 
are being lost in the reactions that are evoked by the manner of your posts.

All of you can well appreciate that I understand each of your perspectives 
and your frustrations with certain issues. In the interest of maintaining 
public peace and one's own personal poise, can we all treat each other with 
a little more civility, if not respect?

3. Finally, please give us moderators some time to react to posts - Ravi, 
Jaldhar and I all live in the US, which is behind Indian time by half a day. 
Posters from India may post something which we would only get to read much 
later - sometimes several hours and sometimes almost a day later. If we are 
slow to take notice, it is because we are busy with various things, and not 
because we agree with everything that one or the other person says. Plus, in 
the recent past, we are facing some technical issues with our server, so 
posts sometimes do not make it through consistently, so we may not even have 
received some mails, making it impossible for us to react to them. 
Perception and reality can be vastly different things - if nothing else, 
this is the first lesson we learn in vedAnta.

Regards,
Vidyasankar

_________________________________________________________________
PC Magazines 2007 editors choice for best Web mailaward-winning Windows 
Live Hotmail. 
http://imagine-windowslive.com/hotmail/?locale=en-us&ocid=TXT_TAGHM_migration_HM_mini_pcmag_0507


