+++
title = "212 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2017-11-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-November/047628.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-November/047628.html)

Free download of the Book, “The Multifaceted Jivanmukta”
<http://svfonline.net/TheMultifacetedJivanmukta.pdf>

The book titled “The Multifaceted Jivanmukta” detailing the life and
teachings of His Holiness Jagadguru Sri Abhinava Vidyatheertha Mahaswamin,
the 35th Jagadguru Shankaracharya of the Sringeri Sri Sharada Peetham, was
released, with much appreciation, on 18th October 2017, His Holiness’s
birth centenary, by the present pontiff of the Peetham, Jagadguru Sri
Bharathi Theertha Mahaswamin, who had earlier graciously penned a
benedictory epistle (*Srimukha*) for the book

His Holiness was truly multifaceted. He was not only a spiritual giant,
*yogin*, *shastraic* scholar, and compassionate preceptor but also an able
administrator and adept in various secular fields. While grounded in
tradition, He was catholic in His outlook.

The role of His Holiness both as an ideal disciple and a perfect Guru has
been presented in depth in several chapters of this book. A detailed
account is provided of His spiritual practices, such as *Hatha-**yoga,
Kundalini-yoga, Nadanusandhana*, contemplation on the *Atman*, meditation
and *samadhi* on divine forms, scripture-based reflection on the Truth and
*Savikalpa-samadhi *and *Nirvikalpa-samadhi* on the Absolute, up to their
culmination in His enlightenment and *jivanmukti* (liberation while living)
even before He was 20 years of age. How He compassionately graced disciples
and others in various ways are covered in depth. His teachings in the form
of parables, essays and expositions too form an important part of this book.

The intellectual acumen of His Holiness was not confined to matters
philosophical and religious. The openness with which He considered the
propositions of science, for instance, merits special mention. “How apt is
it to view modern science as confirming what is said in ancient religious
texts? Are the laws of nature sufficient to account for the appearance and
development of the world and various life-forms? Do the laws of nature have
a foundation? If yes, what is the nature of that basis?” – a chapter of
this book titled “His Scientific Insight” deals with how His Holiness took
up such issues and threw light on them, with complete regard to the
teaching of the scripture and without discounting scientific findings in
any way.

This book has much to offer to all spiritual aspirants and the religious;
to the traditionalists and the liberals; to the intellectuals and the
common folk.

This book can be downloaded free of cost from the following link:
http://svfonline.net/TheMultifacetedJivanmukta.pdf
