+++
title = "154 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2017-08-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046404.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046404.html)

Namaste Praveen Ji,



You had identified two definitions for the two versions of DSV. In the
first post in this thread by Sri Anand Ji, concerning the definition of
DSV, it was pointed out that ten definitions of Drishti Srishti are
presented in Advaita Siddhi out of which Sri MS accepts two definitions,9th
 and 10th, adds some modifications of his own and proceeds to defend them.
I have seen the ten definitions in Advaita Siddhi. The two you have given
correspond exactly to the 1st (for DES)  and  5 th  (for DSKS).  In other
words, what Sri MS has defended  does  not correspond to the definitions of
 either of the two versions DES/DSKS.  I have also checked with  the  hindi
commentary of Swami Maheshananda Giri on Anubhutiprakasha of Swami
Vidyaranya, chapter 8, verse 67, page 768 which deals with DrishtiSrishti.
He follows Sri MS as can be seen in the following quote.



Quote (hindi)  <<  अज्ञात सत्ताक वस्तुएँ  न  मानकर, आत्मा  जब  जो देख  रहाहै
ऐसास्वीकारना दृष्टिसृष्टि  है ।  मधुसूधन  स्वामी  ने  "यदा  यत्  पश्यति
तत्समकालम॓  तत्सृजति"  यही  दृष्टिसृष्टि  का  तात्पर्य  बताया  है । >>



 <<  aj~nAta sattAka vastue.N  na  mAnkar, AtmA  jab  jo dekh  rahAhai
aisAsvIkAranA dRRiShTisRRiShTi  hai |  madhusUdhana  svAmI  ne  "yadA  yat
pashyati tatsamakAlama॓  tatsRRijati"  yahI  dRRiShTisRRiShTi  kA  tAtpary
batAyA  hai | >>.



The reason I am posting this here is because further elaboration in the
hindi commentary practically advances the avasthAtrayavivEka . With my
limited knowledge of hindi, I could get a hang of the commentary sufficient
for my own understanding (स्वार्थ  svArtha), but not enough to convey it to
others (परार्थ parArtha). My understanding could be wrong also. In case you
are interested I thought you might like to have a look and arrive at your
own conclusions. I am not sure if you are familiar with hindi. I would very
much like a translation of the same (commentary on verse 67) for my own
use..



Regards

<https://www.avast.com/sig-email?utm_medium=email&utm_source=link&utm_campaign=sig-email&utm_content=webmail>
Virus-free.
www.avast.com
<https://www.avast.com/sig-email?utm_medium=email&utm_source=link&utm_campaign=sig-email&utm_content=webmail>
<#DAB4FAD8-2DD7-40BB-A1B8-4E2AA1F9FDF2>
