+++
title = "14 Ravi"
date = "1999-06-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-June/010296.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-June/010296.html)

|| AUM mahAgaNapataye namaH ||
|| AUM shrI sha.karAchAryavaryAya namaH ||
|| AUM shrImAtre namaH ||



shrI sha.nkara bhAShyaM on shrI lalitA trishatI
===============================================


Benedictory Verses
==================

vande vighneshvaraM devaM sarvasiddhi pradAyinam.h |
vAmAN^karUDha vAmAkShI karapallava pUjitam.h || 1 ||

I bow to Lord vighneshvara who is adored by the beautiful
eyed shrImAtA sitting on the left lap of Lord shiva with her
palms which are soft like a tender leaf; and who bestows all
powers to His devotees.

ambaaL sits on the left lap of Lord shiva, it is indicated
by many names. For instance, shivakAmeshvarAN^kasthA of
sahasranAma; IshvarotsaN^ganilaya and
kAmeshvarotsaN^gavAsinI of trishatI indicate this.

She is called vAmAkShI because She has beautiful eyes. vAma
means beautiful and akShI means eye. The name vAmanayanA in
sahasranAma is a synonym to this name. Here, one can obtain
other different interpretations by taking vAma to mean left
as well.

Comparison of ambaaL's palm to a tender leaf has an
interesting connection. As umA when She was meditating on
Lord shiva to marry Him, at one stage, She ate with what Her
hands alone can hold. Traditionally people eat from leaf
(like plaintain leaves), hence She was called aparNa. Since
Her palms are like a tender leaf, there was no need for
another leaf.

Lord ganesha is shrImAta's son, hence the word pUjitam can
be more appropriately taken as act of adoration than
worshipping.


[to be continued]

--
Ravi

