+++
title = "167 Raghav Kumar Dwivedula"
date = "2020-08-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055234.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055234.html)

A short speech conveying the blessings of the daxiNAmnAya shAradA pITham by
Srimat Swami Vidushekharabharati ji on the occasion of the groundbreaking
ceremony to restore the temple to Sri Rama at Ayodhya. Advaita
understanding does not preclude taking a position in support of Dharma when
it comes to vyavahAra.

https://youtu.be/Noe5Yxxip1U

One observation  - many non-Indian students of Indian spiritual traditions,
I occasionally touch base with, find it hard to appreciate that a strong
commitment to protection of dharma underlies the transcendence of Dharma
through Advaita. And are surprised by seeing the outpouring of support for
the temple amongst even amongst staunch advaitins;  presumably, given the
strife that preceded it over several decades, they expect advaitins to be
empathetic to those who oppose it ('et tu' is their unasked question to
Indian Advaita followers). Their Advaita appreciation comes along with
their past background of a strong opposition to organized-religion. In
India the situation is of course entirely different.

I mention all this to reiterate that, we have examples like Sri Vidyaranya
Swami who was quite pragmatic in guiding compassionately the princes who
came to him towards establishing the Vijayanagara sAmrAjya to defend the
sanAtana dharma.
Even while compassionately penning the jIvanmuktiviveka and portions of the
panchdashI where everything dualistic is dismissed as 'mAyA' and vedAntic
samAdhi abhyAsa is extolled.

Same goes for Sri Madhusudana Saraswati who (according to many) with all
karuNa had a role in organizing the sannyasis of vArANasI into militant
vigilante akhAras for the protection of dharma even while compassionately
dismissing all dvaita as mithyA in his Advaita siddhi.
