+++
title = "181 Rishi Lamichhane"
date = "2006-03-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016175.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016175.html)

"I try to meditate as often as possible and do
appreciate the benefits of recitation of AUM. As I am not well read with
respect to the scriptures I wish to know from the knowledgable people in
this group about their thoughts on AUM recitation and the correct way to
practise its recitation."

The way I was taught about who is qualified for what mantra and which
mantra requires initiation, etc... is generally extremely liberal.
However, with regard to the pranava, I think it really is not a good
mantra to recite unless one has very strong vairagya.

After properly doing japa of the pranava, there follows a kind of
state (initially unnoticable though) where you don't really want to do
anything (especially you don't want to talk) and are too strongly
introverted. This state can feel mildly depressing because one is used
to the "ups" part of samsara and suddenly it all feels a bit flat
(very different from the more ecstatic states generated by something
like the navarna or the gopala-tapani mantra). For a qualified person
this state induced by the pranava is of course a supremely useful
state to work with.

This happens only when the pranava is pronounced properly, which
generally means short, "gong"-like pronounciations. Reciting it in the
long drawn out fashion (meaning long ooooooooooooommmmmmmmm) is fine
for everyone but its not really different from humming. Its beneficial
because its physically and mentally relaxing but the power of the
mantra as such won't be there.

I think unless you have a qualified preceptor telling you otherwise,
its better if you practice with the mantra of your ishta or kula
devata (so basically I agree with Sri Srivastava).

Regards,

Rishi.

On 3/26/06, Sanjay Srivastava <sksrivastava68 at gmail.com> wrote:
> On 3/26/06, Muralidhar T.S. <ts_murali at hotmail.com> wrote:
>
> I try to meditate as often as possible and do
> > appreciate the benefits of recitation of AUM.
> >
>
> Have you picked up the "AUM" chanting by guru-upadesha or yourself?
>
> The reason I ask this because I heard a talk by Swami Dayananda in which he
> says that recitation of simply "AUM" has been discouraged by shastra-s for
> a householder. Recitation of pure "AUM" may create premature disenchantment
> from worldly life. For a householder "AUM" attached with some other name of
> God such as "Om namo bhagavate vAsudevAya" or "Om namah shivAya" is
> considered more appropriate. Chanting of pure "AUM" is usually for
> sannyAsins.
>
> Of course, it is a different matter if you have started "AUM" chanting by
> guru-upadesha.
>
> praNAm
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

