+++
title = "23 Dr. P.K. Nair"
date = "2002-11-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003992.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/003992.html)

You returned my mail back to me. Hope it is in error and I will hear from
you again soon.

Prasannan
----- Original Message -----
From: Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at BRAINCELLS.COM>
To: <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
Sent: Tuesday, November 05, 2002 8:14 PM
Subject: New member introduction: Dr. P.K. Nair


My name is Prasannan Nair (Prasanna Kumaran Nair). I live in the United
States.

My wife, Shyamala, and I have been students of Vedanta and Hinduism for a
long time. We conduct weekly discussions on Bhagavad Gita in our house.
After one reading of the Gita we switch to an Upanishad.

I am also interested in comparative religion.

In our area, in a town called Temple, we just built a temple and we will
have its Sthana Prathishta and Kumbhabhishekam in January and February
next year. Associated with this, we are holding a symposium titled, "Ekam
Sat Viprah Bahudhaa Vadanti". Swami Chidananda of Vivekananda Mission of
Chicago has kindly agreed to participate in the Symposium and our
functions. I have been asked to co-ordinate the activities by the Board of
Directors of the temple. You will get more info in our redimentary
web-page, hindutemple.org

I am writing all these to let you know of my bachground. I like to join
your discussion group, more for learning than to contribute. I will also
abide by your rules.

Thank you,

sincerely

Prasannan

