+++
title = "11 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2013-01-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-January/033810.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-January/033810.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

What is irking much is surrender of wealth. 

>  Frankly, I dont see anything surprising here.  We should not forget 
that swamiji-s, nowadays,  are also maThAdeesha-s and they are 
unofficially running a widely established educational institutions, 
hospitals etc.  Though these organizations are in the name of some 'Trust' 
for all the practical purposes, these swamiji-s words are final.  Hence 
they have to somehow 'raise' funds to run the show and challenges and 
bettings like this will be a good opportunity for them to fatten their 
'Trust' bank balances :-))

na karmaNa na prajayA dhanEna thyAgEnaikE amrutatvamAsasu:

>  you will be surprised to know the charges they ask for the 'guru pAdukA 
pooja' and personal visit of these swamiji-s.  Yes, they know dhana will 
not lead them to amrutatva but they need 'dhana' in vyavahAra:-)) 
vyAvahArika satya is something different from pAramArthika satya is it 
not:-))

Sanyasa is taken after sacrificing karma, family and wealth.

>  OTOH, taking saNyAsa is an other way to embrace the bigger family in 
the form of maTha, Ashrama, mission etc. :-))

To demand a sanyasi to surrender wealth ( something which he is not 
supposed to 
own)is sort of unimaginable flaw from those who are supposed to uphold 
tradition.

> even jnAni-s like yajnAvalkya in bruhadAraNyaka openly claimed the cows 
from janaka, what to talk about these swamiji-s who are shouldering the 
huge responsibilities of running the institutions, hospitals, mutts, 
schools and colleges :-))

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

PS :  BTW what exactly the subject matter of this debate??  Sorry, I 
cannot read that article in the web, is it about proving the one mutt 
superiority  over  another?? 
