+++
title = "103 Venkatraghavan S"
date = "2016-01-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-January/040053.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-January/040053.html)

Namaste Rajesh ji,
Why should one be concerned with the jnAni's body prArabdha? He is not
concerned with it in the least.

In any case, for your satisfaction, I can suggest the following answers:

1) ShAstra pramANa is pretty categorical that there is no return for a
brahma jnAni. The famously laconic Brahma SUtra, goes to the extent of
repeating अनावृत्तिः शब्दादनावृत्तिः शब्दात्,  ("there is no return, says
the Shruti"). There are various श्रुति प्रमाण for this:
a) तयोर्ध्वमायन्नमृतत्वमेति (Ch 8.6.6, "Going up by that way, one attains
immortality")
b) एतेन प्रतिपद्यमाना इमं मानवमावर्तं नावर्तन्ते नावर्तन्ते (Ch 4.15.5,
"Those who proceed on that path do not return to the life of man"
c) तेषां न पुनरावृत्तिः (Br 6.2.15, "There is no return for them")

2) Secondly, by युक्ति प्रमाण, the body's प्रारब्ध would have to be very
good if brahma jnAna is attained in the first place. If not, how else would
the jnAni's BMI have attained ब्रह्म ज्ञानं and become a ब्रह्म निष्ठ in
that janma? That being the case, how can his प्रारब्ध have a lapse, after
attainment?

3) Thirdly from Anubhava in any discipline we follow, we know that the
effort and discipline required to be a  ब्रह्मज्ञानी and ब्रह्म निष्ठ and
the refinement of mind attained is quite substantial. Following such
discipline, it would be difficult for such a refined mind to suddenly lose
that ब्रह्मज्ञान - this is a person who has internalized पश्यन् श्रृण्वन्
स्पृशन् जिघ्रन्, नैवं किञ्चित् करोमि, to such an extent that this is the
mind's natural thought. For such a ब्रह्मनिष्ठ mind, it is not possible to
revert to a lapse from Brahmanhood.

If concerns still remain that one is not a brahma nishTHA and hence may
lapse, Krishna in Chapter 6 of the Gita says that if such a lapse happens,
that person will be born in an environment conducive for ज्ञान योग in the
next birth and will carry on from where he left off in the previous birth.

Regards,
Venkatraghavan

Namaste Venkatraghavanji,

>>He is ever Brahman in the absolute sense. Jeevanmukti, videhamukti,
prArabdha karma, the body etc are real constructs only for the ajnAni. None
of these are true for the jnAni.>>

Ok

>>There is no need to fear avidya because Brahman is his true svarUpam,
there is nothing that can change that. The important thing to realise is
that it is not the jnAni that has brahma jnAnam, but it is the
mind/intellect that the external world considers as "his". >>>

Ok

>>Even if the jnAni gets a brain injury, it is not the jnAni that gets the
injury, it is the brain.

The jnAni himself (and for the matter, the ajnAni too) is only Brahman.

​>>

​This part is true with ajnAni also. Whatever may be his own conclusion but
he is brahman. So when a jnAni get brain injury OR ajnAni it is brain only
which is getting injured. ​The difference is ajnAni buddhis associate
itself with body mind sense complex and jnAni antahkaraNa does not have any
such association.

​So the question was if there is possibility of Brain injury and coming
back of that association that "I am body mind sens complex." This alone is
the matter either this association can take place in Buddhi again or not.
 ​Factually there is no difference in jnAni and ajnAni other than this
association.

​So I associated it with ​deep sleep if there is any traces of avidhya in
antahkarNa because that alone create the difference.

Thanks

​

Please consider your environmental responsibility. Before printing this
e-mail message, ask yourself whether you really need a hard copy.
