+++
title = "42 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2004-11-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-November/013631.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-November/013631.html)

On Wed, 17 Nov 2004, Ravisankar Mayavaram wrote:

> Jaldhar,
>
> As one of the list administrators,  I do not agree that this
> discussion has to be closed.

Well as everyone can see the discussion has not been stopped.  FYI, I
wrote my initial message after several readers requested it.  I agreed
because

1.  Much of the readership of this list is far removed from the people and
politics involved.  I for one can't read Tamil.  I depend on the scanty
(and often shoddily reported) information I can glean from American
newspapers and from the Gujarati press which seems to be just reprinting
wire service stories.  In that case would "discussion" on my part or
others like me be anything more than a fancy kind of gossip?

I notice the VHP in my area is trying to "educate" people on the issue.
But I remember that when Swami Jayendra was trying to mediate the
Ramajanmabhumi situation in his own way, it was the "Hindutva" brigade
which were the loudest in their attempts to denounce and delegitimize him.
Several of their websites suddenly began linking to an article of ours
where Vidyashankar gave his reasons why he doesn't think Kanchi is one of
the original mathas founded by Shankaracharya as if this minor historical
detail made him any less of a paragon of astika values.  Somehow I don't
think a concern for scholarship was foremost in their minds.  The
interested but unsure public needs to be careful that their legitimate
concern for the honour of sanatana dharma and its leaders is not taken
advantage of by people whose only real interest is in communal mayhem.

2.  For those who are better acquainted with the facts, now is not the
time to be discussing on the Internet.  Direct action is the need of the
hour.  Corruption and political machinations can only take place when the
citizenry are not vigilant.

So by saying don't discuss here, I'm not implying don't pay any attention
to this subject.  But think about what you are actually achieving by this.

-- 
Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>

