+++
title = "77 bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com"
date = "2005-04-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014496.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014496.html)


praNAms Sri K Sundara Raman (KSR) prabhuji
Hare Krishna

KSR prabhuji:

When U bring Mathur people into discussion please understand that the
prakriya of Mathur is slightly different. While they are also Advaithins
some of the Sankara Moola Bhashya in Gita as well as Brahma Suthra are
slightly changed (I can venture to say to suit them-while breaking a word
etc) and give a different meaning.

bhaskar :

Would it be possible for you to tell us where exactly shankara mUla bhAshya
twisted to suit their interpretation prabhuji...The one major difference
that you can find while refuting the view of mUlAvidyA is breaking the
compound word  kAraNa-vidya / kAraNa-avidyA...But while doing so, they have
given ample justification why it should be so..this justification is
ofcourse from *shankara's mUla bhAshya*.

KSR prabhuji:

The advaithins normally would hv left this as a different prakriya

bhaskar :

Sri satchidAnandEndra saraswathi has not invented any new prakriya
prabhuji...his prakriya rather prakriya-s to determine the paramArtha jnAna
of shruti-s have the firm base in shankara's mUla prasthAna trayi bhAshya.

KSR prabhuji:

but for the fact that the Sanyasin from H.pur said that Vivekachoodamani
was not written by Sri Adisankara

bhaskar :

Sri SatchidAnandEndra Saraswati has given his view points elaborately in
the introduction to his kannada commentary on vivEkachudAmaNi & clarified
why he thinks author of VC is different from mUla bhAshyakAra.

KSR prabhuji:

and also used some abusive language in respect of Sri Padmapada while
discussing Moola Vidyanirasa.

bhaskar :

Swamiji of HN Pur discusses paNcha pAdika vivaraNa prasthAna as well as
bhAmati prasthAna in his sanskrit master piece vEdAnta prakriya
pratyabhigna & as you mentioned above another sanskrit work *mUlAvidyA
nirAsa* but in neither of these books swamiji has used any abusive language
to propagate his views...Kindly quote the exact reference where swamiji
using *abusive language* against any advaita Acharaya-s.

Some of the list members here are also very much familiar with swamiji's
works, I request them to clarify this claim from KSR prabhuji.

KSR prabhuji:

This irked Advaithins and they retaliated by condemning the Sanyasin
particularly the sishyas of  Sringeri.

bhaskar :

can you tell me more about this prabhuji?? For that matter, one of
swamiji's direct desciples Sri jnAnAnandEndra saraswati (formerly Sri
Vittala Shastri, AshthAna vidwAn Mysore) had very good rapport with
sringeri saMpradAya & at sannidhAnaM of Late HH Sri Abhinava vidyAthIrtha,
he had a discussion on mUlAvidyA with another pundit of Sringeri based on
shankara's sUtra bhAshya & kArikA bhAshya.

KSR prabhuji:

I have visited mathur with my Guru Sri R Krishnamurthy Sastrigal for a
religious seminor and stayed for a week when I picked up the above.The
group will accept only Sankara Moola Bhashya and further commentaries on
Brahma Suthra like Bhamathi,parimalam are not accepted by them.

bhaskar :

but you must know prabhuji, Swamiji of HN pur do agree with shankara's
direct desciple Sri sureshwarAchArya's view points in vArtika & naishkarmya
siddhi.  His prakriya-s are not anyway entirely a new stream of thoughts in
the name of shankara siddhAnta !!!

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



