+++
title = "29 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-03-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040331.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040331.html)

It is an invented explanation by some people to say Hindus never ate beef.
A motivated explanation. As I have said in the earlier post there are many
places where beef eating by brahmins is mentioned. If you are interested google
for the same.
regards,
Sarma.


On Wed, Mar 2, 2016 at 3:01 PM, Shashwata Shastri
<shashwata.unimas at gmail.com> wrote:
> I was not going against the commentator Shankara. I found this explanation
> on Gitapress's Brihadaranyaka's commentary. They also followed Shankara's
> commentary. But used a different kind of explanation for the word mamsa,
> rishava and ukshana.
>
> Shashwata Chowdhury
>
> On Tue, Mar 1, 2016 at 6:29 AM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ
> <dvnsarma at gmail.com> wrote:
>>
>> The commentator Sankara Bhagavatpada has explained the Brihadarnyaka
>> passage as the meat of an ox are male calf.
>> He used the word "पुंगव". He did not mention any herbs. Since Sankara
>> is earlier in time and supposed to have known the tradition better
>> than us the moderners, I think we have to accept his explanation.
>> Besides this there are many places where beef eating has been
>> mentioned.
>> It is sheer waste of time to pursue these things.
>> regards,
>> Sarma.
>>
>>
>> On Tue, Mar 1, 2016 at 1:14 AM, Shashwata Shastri via Advaita-l
>> <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>> > In eight Maha Oushadhi I found two herbs which are named as Rishava and
>> > Ukshana. Did the Brihadaranyaka mentioned about these particular herbs
>> > in
>> > that passage?
>> > Shashwata Chowdhury
>> > _______________________________________________
>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>> >
>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>> >
>> > For assistance, contact:
>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
