+++
title = "25 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-03-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-March/026663.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-March/026663.html)

Dear Jaldhar:

I totally agree with you that "Advaita Vedanta shows us there is an alternative"

Here is my alternative, that needs to be practiced not just discussed.

If one accepts that we are of this "brahman", we automitically becomes Gods and it is our responsibility to do our utmost for preserving that exists and becomes master's our own destiny.

When one perceives that GOD is other than himself ( aham brahmaasmi ) then only he learns to preserve or adopt the path for charting his own destiny, either as and individual or as a community and/or as a Nation..

We we sing Indiand National Anthem the bhaarata bhaagya vidhaathaa is not the Gerogen the 5th but we as Indians needed to take that role for dispensing the destiny of our Nation. It is unfortunate that our spritual ;leaders never place the emphasis on practice. They rather take pleasure and remain contented on acknowledging Acharys worship their rich philosophical heritage and forget the present and claim to remain academic "Vedaanti".

All knowledge is for the living and enriching it.

Just something to think about?

Best regards,

Dr. Yadu
--- On Tue, 3/8/11, Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com> wrote:

From: Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Animal faced gods in Hinduism
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Tuesday, March 8, 2011, 4:13 PM

On Tue, 8 Mar 2011, Dr. Yadu Moharir wrote:

> With this are you suggesting the "He" and "US" are different ?
> 

As with so many Vedantic topics, it depends. In chhandogyopanishad there is the story of devaraja Indra and daityaraja Virochana who both learned brahmavidya but only Indra understood it properly. Virochana just understood it to mean "I am God so I can do whatever I like." The Devas are the children of Aditi (infinity) while Daityas are the children of Diti (Finity). The limited mind will see everything it perceives as an extension of ego and anything beyond its comprehension as "difference." But Advaita Vedanta shows us there is an alternative.

-- Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




