+++
title = "196 Jagannath Chatterjee"
date = "2002-08-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003550.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003550.html)

Dear Roger,

You are pretty senior to me so please do not mind if I
address you as a friend.

You are right. It is a pity science cannot go beyond
established empirical reasoning and that the scientist
cannot "feel" the experiment. However, as Fritzof
Capra points out in "The Tao of Physics", scientists
now acknowledge that a state exists beyond the
experiment, a state spoken of, albeit in abstract
terms, in our Vedas and Upanishats. In advanced
experiments into the ultimate "particle" it is now
established that it can either be energy or matter but
not the same at any given time. Moreover the end
results of the experiments depend on the subject
rather than the object; the subjects individual makeup
determines the results! So we are probably very close
to establishing the missing link between science and
spirituality. It would not be improper to mention that
one of the foremost scientists of India, "Prez A K
Azad" is a devout Muslim and a neo-vedantist to boot.
He has not lost his moorings in religion!

Looking forward to more such contributions from you,

Regards
Jagannath


__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
Yahoo! Finance - Get real-time stock quotes
http://finance.yahoo.com

