+++
title = "44 Venkatraghavan S"
date = "2016-12-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043596.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043596.html)

Namaste Sri Bhaskarji,

No worries at all - I'm not offended in any way. I was merely making a
factual point that the inner workings of any mind are known only to the
witness of that mind. Any specific comment made about anyone else's mind
would not be based on directly perceived facts and hence speculative.

Even if what you said about this mind is is factually true, I am not
offended. The faults of the mind are kshetra dharma, to be corrected over
time with perseverance.

Coming to your question, whatever doubts I have about siddhAnta are
resolved through enquiry aided by guru and shAstra. So no, I do not have
doubts about avidyA and mAya being same because I have gone through that
enquiry and satisfied myself. If new information emerges, I am happy to
revisit the analysis, and change my conviction if necessary. I am more
interested in what is right than being right.

By the way, this is not relevant to shAstra (its more about personal
sAdhana) so if you would like to continue the conversation on these lines,
please mail me privately and I would be happy to respond where relevant.

Regards,
Venkatraghavan

On 7 Dec 2016 6:15 a.m., "Bhaskar YR" <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com> wrote:

praNAms Sri Venkatraghavan prabhuji

Hare Krishna



Your comment, as a general comment, is fine. If it was directed here,
whether my mind has doubts / or blindly accepts / or has analysed it as
well as it can before accepting anything, you have no way of knowing, so
your comment is speculative at best.



Ø   Kindly don’t take it personally and get offended prabhuji.  Just to
clarify,  I was just curious how can an intelligent, veda, shAstra,
bhAshya, nyAya vida prabhuji like you would not get any doubt when equated
two entirely different concepts like avidyA & mAya that too when
bhAshyakAra and other Acharaya-s in tradition (not definitely only Sri SSS
but also other traditional Acharya-s) saying something different from
this.  Hence my first query directed to you only. i.e.  Dont you get any
saiddhAntika doubts like this when someone equates avidyA with mAya out of
context prabhuji?? Whereas my second statement is a general observation
i.e. including me, hence I said ‘our inquisitive mind’, ‘we think’, we have
settled issues’ etc. If you still insist that you & others have to be
spared from this general observation prabhuji, I am ready  to make my
second statement as ego-centric one and offer my unconditional apologies
for making this statement in general.



Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!

bhaskar
