+++
title = "270 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-10-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047292.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047292.html)

DearFriends,            Today many people celebrate as 'Bhagini hasta Bhojan' as it is a boon from Lord Yama Dharma Raja that those sister who offers food to their brothers on this day will not have the fear of death. The story goes like this is that Yama is the son of Lord surya and Yamuna is the daughter. Since Yamuna always walks in front and never comes back and it is symbol of time also. Yama is the Lord of death who grants the death so easily in time with out any difficulty as a duty. Once it happened that on this Sukla Dwitiya of the Kartiki, Yamuna offered bhojan to Yama. The Lord of Justice, the Yama was so pleased for her sister's affection and granted the boon that who ever offer bhojan to their brothers on this particular day will have the blessings from me that they will not have 'Apa Mrutyu Bhayam'.
Why the sister's are called as Bhagini's is that as they were travelling in same time with us little forward or backward, but they are sharing the same 'bhagam' of the mother yoni from which both arrived. It is the Karmic bondage only , not like that you wanted some body as sister or you wanted somebody as brother. or you have not made any equation that you want to become brother & she wants to become sister.Sister's & Brother's share their karma or Karma Phalawith regardsKameswara RaoDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
