+++
title = "44 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2008-07-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020376.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020376.html)

Namaste Latha-Ji:

Now the question arises how this applies to present ? How does one practice this Or are we just supposed to lock ourselves in the ivory towers of advaita ? or should we just gloat on the advaitic philosophy ?

I am not interested in your shaastric statements but your thoughts on this issue !?

IMHO- Anything that does not have an application has very little or novalue at the present moment.

I am glad that at least you feel it being necessary to be on this list and share yourunderstanding!

Thanks,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Thu, 7/3/08, latha vidyaranya <lathavidya at yahoo.co.in> wrote:

From: latha vidyaranya <lathavidya at yahoo.co.in>
Subject: [Advaita-l] Fw: Re: law of karma
To: "Advaita List" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Thursday, July 3, 2008, 11:25 PM

hari om
namaste

as long as we perceive ourselves as a body-mind complex, Ishwara remains
separate, or rather we perceive Ishwara to be a separate entity from us who is
dispensing to usthe fruits of our karmas and driving our lives. this is
standing at a lower rung of the evolutionary ladder.

for somebody who has climbed the top rung of the ladder and realized the
"aham brahmasmi" tattva, the ladder itself does not exist, nor a
separate identity from that of Ishwara. both would merge then. then there would
be no need for making entries in advaita List here!

namaste

--- On Thu, 3/7/08, Dr. Yadu Moharir <ymoharir at yahoo.com> wrote:



Can you please help me understand why you aretrying to perceive ishvra as
being separate from you ? Dose this not go against the primary foundation
of advaita "aham brahmaaasmi".

Thank You,

Dr. Yadu


Unlimited freedom, unlimited storage. Get it now


      Best Jokes, Best Friends, Best Food and more. Go to
http://in.promos.yahoo.com/groups/bestofyahoo/
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




