+++
title = "182 D.V.N. Sarma"
date = "2010-03-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/023893.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/023893.html)

Can kindly give the URL for the telugu edition of Nirnaya Sindhu at orchive.org?

regards,
Sarma.

On 2/26/10, sthanunathan Ramakrishnan <r_sthanu at yahoo.com> wrote:
>> ------------------------------
>>
>> Message: 5
>> Date: Thu, 25 Feb 2010 06:11:06 -0500
>> From: Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian <rama.balasubramanian at gmail.com>
>> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Ekadashi Questions
>> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
>>     <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>> Message-ID:
>>     <d6ea147d1002250311w60abf25fm6393fa01f132b36c at mail.gmail.com>
>> Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
>>
>> On Thu, Feb 25, 2010 at 1:10 AM, Siva Senani Nori
>> <sivasenani at yahoo.com>wrote:
>>
>> > Dear Sri Sthanunathan
>> >
>> > Nirnaya Sindhu, also called Kala Nirnayah, written in
>> the 17th century by
>> > Sri Kamalakara Bhatta is a compendium of such issues.
>> There is a later
>> > derivative book called Dharma Sindhu by Kasinatha
>> Upadhyaya which deals with
>> > it. We are smarta Brahmins from Vengi (the region
>> between Krishna and
>> > Godavari near the Eastern coast) in AP, and in all
>> such matters the word of
>> > Dhrama Sindhu is taken as binding in our families.
>> >
>> > The Nirnaya Sagar edition of the Nirnaya Sindhu in
>> Devanagari characters is
>> > available in the Digital Library of India at
>> > http://dli.iiit.ac.in/cgi-bin/Browse/scripts/use_scripts/advnew/metainfo.cgi?&barcode=2020010008716.
>> > There is also a verion in Telugu characters with
>> translation into Telugu
>> > available at archive.org, but that might not be
>> relevant to most. Anyway
>> > it is only a simple Google search away.
>> >
>> > In the very beginning these books - both the Nirynaya
>> Sindhu and Dharma
>> > Sindhu - haves a lengthy discourse on EkaadaSi - how
>> to determine ekaadaSi,
>> > what are the vratas to be followed, who should follow
>> it, what are the rules
>> > for Vaishnavas, what are the rules for smaartas etc.
>> >
>> > Broadly speaking tithis are Suddha or viddha (that is
>> they have a vedha, an
>> > overlapping, by some other tithi). Vaishnavas reckon
>> the vedha based on
>> > Arunodaya (4 ghadiyas - a ghadiya is 24 minutes; 60
>> ghadiyas make a day -
>> > before sunrise, suryodaya) and smaartas based on
>> Suryodaya; depending on the
>> > kind of vedha or absence thereof, and of the type of
>> adhikya
>> > (another aspects of tithi, too involved to be
>> discussed here) there are
>> > eighteen types of ekadaSi for Vaishnavas and Smartas
>> each. I also noticed
>> > two types of Vaishnavas - Suddha and sarva - but since
>> this is not a
>> > Vaishnava forum and since most of us here are not
>> intimately aware of
>> > divisions amongst them, we will let that be.
>> >
>> > For each of these types of ekadaSi, the rules differ
>> slightly. The details
>> > would not be of interest to the readers of that list
>> and so are skipped. If
>> > you insist, we can correspond privately on that.
>> >
>>
>> Very informative and please do post it, it would be of
>> interest to many.
>>
>> Thanks!
>>
>> Rama
>>
>
> Namaskara Sri Senani,
>
> Yes, Indeed its very informative. Please do post more on it.
>
> Thanks
> Sthanu
>
>
>       The INTERNET now has a personality. YOURS! See your Yahoo! Homepage.
> http://in.yahoo.com/
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

