+++
title = "23 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2004-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-April/012942.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-April/012942.html)

[forwarded message from Ananth Padmanabhan]

Regarding the topic of[nirgunam-sagunam],[sakara-nirakara]

Taittriya Upanishad also explains in the Bruhuvalli the same 'samastha'
state where there is no duality. It explains the negation of all the
'kosas',in step, until the ultimate 'anandamaya' state is reached.
'Imaallogaan Kamaannee kaamaroopyanu sancharan| YEdhatt
saamagayannaasthE|..SuvarnajjoythI:...
Brahman is an experential state and all the words and meanings , perhaps
can help the mumuukshu to understand as he progresses. These scriptures,
words etc are just like the stick that is used during cremation that
ensures the body is fully taken up by agni and finally the stick too gets
consumed by the Agni!. This is what Bhagawan Ramana maharishi explains in
his 'Direct Path' in his 'Naan Yaar(Who am I). He calls the process as '
pinamchudu thadi pOl' in Tamil.

A.Padmanabhan

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Dr.Ganesh's commentary Regarding the topic
of[nirgunam-sagunam],[sakara-nirakara]

Regarding the topic of[nirgunam-sagunam],[sakara-nirakara]

Gaudapada in his karika comments on the word nirvikaram in the
alanthasanthi
chapter 74 th verse. He says Brahman is beyond modification which means
beyond
time [because cause and effect are within time]. Really speaking Brahman
cannot
be called nirvikaram alsothis word is used from vyavahara drshti only.
From
vyavahara drshti we say Brahman is jagat karanam and nirvikaram is used
only
to negate savikaram. Once savikaram is negated then the word nirvikaram
becomes
irrelevant. All brahmans description as nir--- etc are only to negate
the
misconception. From turiyam stand point no word can be used, not even
advaitam
as advaitam has a meaning only with reference dvaitam. Silence or amatra
can
only be used to indicate that absolute state, this silence is not absence
of
sounds as that would also fall within dvandva, it has to be that which
illumines
both relative silence and sounds.
Dr s.ganesh

