+++
title = "213 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-06-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/001085.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/001085.html)

I once read a verse (translated in English) which runs something like this:

Worship (or rituals) performed in one's house have some merit.  When the
same is done on a river bank has 10 times merit (put some number there, I
can't remember the exact multiplier) ....... when the same is done in a
temple it is so and so, ......... when done in an Ashram in the presence of
a self-realized saint it is so and so (the last has the highest merit).

How does that relate to what you have written below ?  It is quite possible
that the verse may be just a fabrication of some intellectual, not
necessarily the truth.

Also, I read in the book "Guru Tradition" by former Shankaracharya of Kanchi
that the institutionalization of temples was only after Shankara's times.
Shankara used it as a counter-measure to the Buddhist viharas which were
then vigorously teaching the Buddhist tradition and let everybody (all
varnas) learn their texts.

(I don't have the book with me right now or else I could confirm what I have
written - I will do it over the weekend).

Is it true that the idea of temples is really a post-Shankaran artifact.
The only reference to a temple that I seem to have read of in the PurAnas is
that of Rukmini going to a temple when Krishna abducted(rescued) her and
married her.

Any views ??


>From: "Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>Reply-To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
><ADVAITA-L at braincells.com>
>To: ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG
>Subject: Re: Fwd: A question
>Date: Tue, 27 Jun 2000 00:41:20 -0400
>
>On Sun, 25 Jun 2000, Ravisankar Mayavaram wrote:
>
> > > For Hindu's is worship in the the home or worship in the temple more
> > > important? Why?
>
>Definitely the home.  Every person has a personal responsibility to
>perform the required rituals in the appropriate manner.  No one can do
>them for him.  And as home is where you spend most of your time, this
>is where the personal worship should take place.
>
>The benefit of the temple is that is a place where one can be in contact
>with other devotees.  This is called satsang.  When people pray together
>with devotion it will enhance the effect.
>
>--
>Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>
>--
>bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
>Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
>Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

