+++
title = "228 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-September/028883.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-September/028883.html)

Namaste:

Is this not similar to "Alla" giving the "Koran" to Mohammad? or God giving the text to Jesus?

As per advaita - " me & brahman (God) are the same".


To me the trikaalaatiita knowledge given in the ancient text is the most important portion our ancestors wanted us to use for making our life more productive or livable.This nityatva needs to be classified as apauruShya.


Thanks

Dr. Yadu



________________________________
From: Raghav Kumar <raghavkumar00 at gmail.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Thursday, September 8, 2011 10:54 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] definition of apauruSheyatvam ?

Namaste

A reference for Apaurusheyatvam ("authorlessness") of the Veda

“parameshvaraH …...vedarAshiM tadarthAn cha yugapat.h jAnan eva karotIti na
vedasya paurusheyatA”
“yatra hi arthaj~nAna pUrvakam vAkya-j~nAnam vAkya-sRShTau kAraNam, tatra
paurusheyatA, atra ca yaugapadyAt na sA“ .(bhAShya ratnaprabhA
sub-commentary, introductory gloss on the third brahma-sUtra,
"shaastra-yonitvaat").)

Rough translation: The Lord manifested the collection of veda-mantra-s
together with their meaning/knowledge simultaneously. A given text is
termed "paurusheya", when we see that the shabdArtha j~nAna
(knowledge/insight/meaning conveyed by the words) is prior to and becomes
the cause for the manifestation of the shabda (the word which is thus
articulated by effort). Now, in the case of the Veda-mantra-s, the
sabda (words) and sabdArtha (knowledge/meaning) arise together inseparably
(as in the case of parameshvaraH), therefore they are termed "apaurusheya."


Raghav
