+++
title = "179 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-09-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042431.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042431.html)

Sri Sujal Ji,



My understanding is very different.  The concept of “ moksha “ is unique to
each of the Shad-darshanas. Confining to Yoga and Vedanta darshanas only,
for example Yoga Darshana does not subscribe to एकमेवाद्वितीयम्
(ekamevAdvitIyam) concept for Brahman as opposed to Vedanta Darshana. Hence
the concept of “ moksha “ is different for the two. I will confine myself
to Vedanta Darshana alone furtheron.



Mind is a created entity from the panchabhutas. It is not destroyed till
the fall of the body (at the time of death) after attaining Jnana.
Regarding “moksha”, there are two types.



1. “Liberation from embodiment”. This is achieved on attaining ज्ञान
(Jnana). Two views are held by Advaitins as regards its timing. One is that
it is coterminous with the attainment of ज्ञान (Jnana) ( Swami Vidyaranya
supports this view). The other is that it is achieved after the fall of the
current body(at the time of death) for a Jnani.



2. “Freedom from bondage” (achieved in this life itself). This is the state
of Jivanmukta. There is no unanimity amongst advaitins on this concept. I
will present only  the view broughtout in Jivanmuktiviveka of Swami
Vidyaranya.



A mumukshu can have either of these two as his Goal to be achieved. The
difference between the two is related to the following three factors. 1.
Attainment of ज्ञान (Jnana)  2. वासनाक्षय (vAsanAkShaya) 3. मनोनाश
(manonAsha). The meaning of ज्ञान (Jnana) is clear. The meaning of वासनाक्षय
(vAsanAkShaya) is effacement of latent impressions. The meaning of मनोनाश
(manonAsha) is dissolution of mind (very different from destruction of the
mind). For “liberation from embodiment”, attainment of ज्ञान (Jnana) is the
necessary and sufficient condition. While it is possible to achieve this
through ज्ञान (Jnana) alone, It is not possible to achieve this by the
other two alone.  For “ freedom from bondage “ (to be achieved in this life
itself), that is to be a Jivanmukta, all the three ज्ञान (Jnana) वासनाक्षय
(vAsanAkShaya) and मनोनाश (manonAsha) have to be achieved.



For attainment of ज्ञान (Jnana) the prescribed sAdhana is shravana manana
nididhyAsana. For attainment of the other two the sAdhanAs prescribed in
Yoga ShAstra are one of the means. There are other means also like upAsana
etc.



I have just presented only the conclusions without the details as there are
too many concepts involved and it is not possible to cover them all in a
single post of reasonable length. Those interested may refer to relevant
texts or take them up for discussions in separate threads.



Pranams and Regards


>
