+++
title = "203 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042495.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042495.html)

Sri Ravi Kiran Ji,



Namaskaram.



 Reg  << However, if one claims, based on pramAna and sva anubhava, that
this ekatva jnAna from Sruti is necessary but not sufficient for
experiencing Brahman (prajnA) and the need for secondary jnAna (Atma
sAkshAtkAra or AtmAvagati or Atma darshana) through nirvikalpaka samAdhi
(NS) for destroying further avidyA beeja remnants/residues ( not destroyed
or sublated from the ekatva jnAna attained from Sruti mahA vAkya, which is
only an indirect knowledge obtained from instruction manual), would be
interested to hear more details of such NS jnAna, one has attained in NS.
>>,



I must clarify I have not mentioned about any such “NS jnAna, one has
attained in NS”. Attainment of jnana mentioned by me also is not “the
ekatva jnAna attained from Sruti mahA vAkya, which is only an indirect
knowledge obtained from instruction manual”, but the
aparokshajnana(intuitive,immediate) without any pratibandhaka etc(any other
restrictive qualifications one may like to add) as per accepted adavaita
sidhanta.  Your statement “However, if one claims, based on pramAna and sva
anubhava, that this ekatva jnAna from Sruti is necessary but not sufficient
for experiencing Brahman (prajnA)” is also not in accordance with what  I
have mentioned. I quote from my earlier post.



Quote  << Second is “freedom from bondage”. This mainly concerns, in
addition to the above, absolute eradication of sorrow and begetting
happiness. No doubt these also ensue on attainment of jnana >>.  Unquote.



This is “experiencing Brahman (prajna)”. The sAdhaka who attains jnana does
indeed experience this bliss at that time. In fact attainment of jnana is
nirvikalpaka samAdhi (NS) according to advaita sidhanta ( I do anticipate
strong opposition to this statement. I only request that if so the issue
may be takenup as a separate thread and not mixedup with this thread).  The
further practices prescribed for jivanmukti are NOT for gaining any
“secondary jnana’(using your terminology) but ONLY for ensuring constancy
and stability of this NS. I recap from my earlier post.



Quote  << but according to the text Jivanmuktiviveka by Swami Vidyaranya,
in the case of sAdhakas who have not fully cultivated वासनाक्षय
(vAsanAkShaya) and मनोनाश (manonAsha), due to absence of rigorous practice
and being influenced from time to time by fructifying prArabdhakarma that
leads to enjoyment, eradication of sorrow and begetting of  happiness is
not consistent and stable. Depending upon the intensity of prior practice
of वासनाक्षय (vAsanAkShaya) and मनोनाश (manonAsha), they frequently lapse
into the normal mode of vyavaharika experience.Thus they partially lose the
benefit of jnana attained by them.>>.  Unquote.



This stand is considered by many advaitins as admitting to avidyabeeja
after attaining knowledge which according to them is not acceptable. I had
pointed this out earlier also and mentioned that Swami Vidyaranya has
justified his stand by providing pramana from
Sruti,Smruti,Yogavasishtha,Sutaamhita etc.



Regards
