+++
title = "79 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2014-02-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-February/036482.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-February/036482.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Many people here have said Krishna is also Mithya. There is a counter
point. Everything is Brahman also. Krishna is Brahman but the stone lying
in the street is also Brahman. Can we bring that stone home and worship it
like Krishna? No.

>  why we need to bring the stone,   when the street, house etc.  also 
that brahman &  the person bringing that stone is also brahman??  So, when 
we really realize the everything is brahman there is no need to bring one 
thing for another and worship, for him brahman is left, right, top, bottom 
everywhere..We have heard about the jnAni-s who used offer flower to 
themselves in ecstasy in pUja..sOham bhavena pUjayet. 


Conclusion. In a way everything is Brahman. But some things are closer to
Brahman. In a way everything is Mithya but some things are less Mithya 
than
other things.

>  IMHO, it's all in one's own perception...But for that real brahman 
there is nothing near & nothing is distanced from him. It is all in the 
perception of the person who is still seeing the duality.

Example is given by Pandita Sri K. S. Varadacharya in introduction to Sri
Bhashya. He is telling Advaitis not to treat all Vastus equally. 

>  He might not be knowing that advaitins are not trying to wear ring as 
bangles, though both ring and bangles are gold only. 

Ganga river flows from Himalaya to many places. In some places it is 
flowing near
temples, in some places it is flowing in gutters and ditches. Will you 
take
bath in gutter water because it is Ganga? Is gutter water same as Gangotri
water because both are Ganga? Like this everything is Brahman but we 
cannot
give same respect and importance to all things.

>  Perhaps he might not be aware of the vyavahArika satya which holds its 
reality in its own realm.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

