+++
title = "92 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028006.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028006.html)

Namaste jaldhar-Ji;

When I was kid, I had asked this question to one of or family priests, what is the meaning of "Vighneshvra" he quickly answered that it is so because he has the special powers that enables him to destroys "Vighna".

So I continued and asked, if that is so, then what is the meaning of "jagadishvara". Does it ,mean that it tha the deity that destroys the universe? It is need less to say that my original question never got answer.

I am convinced that we, the Indians, love to operate between "parikshaara" and "samanvaya".

It is only the knowledge that one can come over the obstacles. (j~naana maarga) not through some blind faith in a smapradaaya. Is that not what Achaarya advocated !?


Your comments are always appreciated.

Rgds,

Dr. Yadu


________________________________
From: Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Wednesday, July 6, 2011 3:22 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] 'VinAyaka' in ShAnkara GItA BhAShyam

On Wed, 6 Jul 2011, Dr. Yadu Moharir wrote:

> Namaste:
> 
> I am not aware of name Vinaayaka occurring in atharvashiirSha !?
> I know of ekadnata, gaNapataye, la.mbodara, shuurpkarNa, vighnanaashine
> shivasutaaya,
> 
> If there is a paaThabheda, kindly send me the reference.
> 

No sorry I didn't mean to imply that there was. I am just saying that Brahman manifests as Ganapati. As Vighneshvara he has the power over the obstacle-causing Vinayakas thus he bears the name in the same way as a King could be addreased by the name of his people or kingdom.

Interestingly I was just reading today about the clans or tribes of Scotland where a similar custom occurs. The chiefs of clans like MacLeod, MacDonald etc. would be known as the MacLeod, the MacDonald and so on. Sanskrit grammar doesn't have definite articles but the principle is the same.



-- Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
