+++
title = "95 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-07-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028010.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028010.html)

Namaste Subbu-Ji:

Of course I am aware of this

Yes, his name is Vighnahartaa, as well. So, do advatins in various maTha worship him as Vighnahartaa or vighnakartaa icon?


Also, in your opinion is his worship and offerings to him, or surrendering to him account for getting merit points () as his bhakta) that he does not create "Vighna" for the one's who surrender to him? If one were to accept this then it does conform with the traits and properties with the Vinaayaka as well as rudra gaNa he is supposed to lead, as GaNapati, GaNaadhyakhsa, GaNanaayaka ... etc. As you have pointed out from the beginning of this thread that this is a "ugra" devataa.


But why worship the the ugra and taamasika manner is another conundrum that needs addressing. I will share my views on this issue after I hear from other scholars.


Rgds,

Dr. Yadu




________________________________
From: V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Wednesday, July 6, 2011 9:47 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] 'VinAyaka' in ShAnkara GItA BhAShyam

विघ्नकर्त्रे नमः
विघ्नर्त्रे नमः

On Thu, Jul 7, 2011 at 9:33 AM, raghavender ganti <rganti9 at yahoo.com> wrote:

> Sri Gurubhyon Namaha
>                 I presume that Vighneshwara mean the lord
> of Vignas or obstacles, i.e he has complete control over them, he can create
> or destroy vighnas. It would not just mean destroyer of vighnas
>

विघ्नराजाय नमः
विघ्नकर्त्रे नमः
विघ्नहर्त्रे नमः

The corresponding names in VishNusahasranama are: भयकृत्, भयनाशनः

Regards,
subrahmanian.v

>
>
>
>
>
>
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
