+++
title = "52 U.K Anumula"
date = "2004-11-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-November/013617.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-November/013617.html)

The Tamil Nadu Government, a responsible body answerable to ithe state's 
legislature and, equally importantly to the Judiciary and the media, not to 
speak of public opinion has according to the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, 
found substantial evidence against the Kanchi Sankaracharya to justify his 
arrest.   There is no reason why prima facie the allegations should not be 
considered genuine.  The judiciary, after examining the evidence, will no 
doubt convict him or acquit him either honourably or because the evidence is 
insufficient to convict him or there is reasonable doubt.  We should neither 
judge him to be guilty nor conclude that he was unfairly charged until the 
conclusion of the case.   A true advaitin is a rational creature who does 
not come to conclusions based on hearsay or preconceived notions.   Adi 
Sankara would have adopted this stand.

There is however one unfortunate aspect to the controversy.   There appears 
to be a rejoicing among non-Brahmins and sense of grievance among Brahmins.  
  This is a direct result of the caste system in India and the perverse 
directions it has taken in South India.   Brahmins have to indulge in 
introspection to find why non-Brahmins hate them that much.   Why do even 
illiterate Brahmins consider themselves socially superior to the most 
well-educated non-Brahmins?

I beg to be excused if I have hurt the sentiments of some participants of 
this excellent forum.

-----Umakantha Sarma.



