+++
title = "281 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-10-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047305.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047305.html)

Dear Shankta Bandhu's,                     Some time back sriramspata sati was mentioning some query regarding to patra sthapana/sadhana in srividya navavarna puja. I am here with mentioning some of the points which clears most of the queries.
The first & fore most qualification for a Sri Vidya Upasaka to perform Pooja is obtaining Diksha from a competent Guru. the rite called Diksha is supposed to be destroying all the limiting factors of the individual self and facilitate his union with Shiva.aIyate shivasAyujyaM kShIyate pAshabandhanam |
atha dIkSheti kathitaM budhaiH sacChAstravedibhiH ||
It is the Guru who, after testing the disciple's competence, initiates him into the Upasana by teaching him the mantra, the Devata Swaroopa and the methods of performing the rituals. Though the Sadhaka begins initially with external rituals, he should rise to the level of performing Antaryaga as set out in Bhavanopanishad. The first step in Bahiryaga is the method of entering the room of worship. Next follows Tatva Achamana. This is a cleansing process carried out by ingesting drops of water four times or seven times, praying each time for the cleansing of the Anava, Mayika and Karmika Malas, which is accomplished by the usage of Bija mantras. This prepares the Sadhaka's mental frame and sets it ready for the Jnana swaroopa to shine.The next and the most important step is performing GuruPaduka Vandana. This involves paying one's respect to the lotus feet of the Guru. There is a special prescribed procedure for performing this. Guru's feet are supposed to be on the head of the Upasaka. Therefore, he has to worship with his hands locked in Mrigi Mudra, the sandals of the preceptor. This procedure calls for worshipping his own master (Guru), the Guru's Guru (Parama Guru) and his Guru (Parameshthi Guru). There are three separate mantras for each of these. The GuruPaduka mantras collectively connote the same concept as that of the Mahavakya – Tatvamasi. Actually, these syllables are represented one each by the three Paduka mantras.
In the Navavarana Pooja, the following main Nyasas are generally performed:1. Matrika Nyasa (Antarmatrika and Bahirmatrika Nyasa). Actually there are 14 types of Matrika Nyasas prescribed namely, Bindumatrika, Visargamatrika, Binduvisargamatrika, Hrillekhadimatrika, Bijadimatrika, Kamadimatrika, Tribijadimatrika, Balasamputitamatrika, Parasamputitamatrika, Srividyayuktamatrika, Hamsamatrika, Paramahamsamatrika, Pranavakalamatrika and Ashtatrimshatkala Matrika Nyasas. In addition to these, 2. Karashuddhi Nyasa,3. Atmaraksha and Balashadanga Nyasa,4. Chaturasana (or Shadasana) Nyasa,5. Antashchakra and Bahishchakra Nyasas, 6. Mahakameshwaryadi Nyasa,7. Moola Vidya Varna Nyasa8. Laghu Shoda Nyasa (which involves Ganesha, Graha, Nakshatra, Yogini, Rashi and Pitha Nyasas)9. Maha Shodha Nyasa (which involves Prapancha, Bhuvana, Murti, Mantra, Daivata and Matrika Bhairava Nyasas)10. Srichakra Nyasa (again of three types: Srishti, Sthiti and Samhara).
Patra sadhana details will be in my next mail.Kameswarananda
Dr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
