+++
title = "27 Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas"
date = "2007-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019085.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019085.html)

Nasmaste
The answer to this seemingly difficult question can be found in "Yoga,
enlightenment and Perfection of Sri Mahasannidhanam" written by Sri R.
M. Umeshji. The author vividly describes how H. H. Sri Chandrashekhara
Bharati Mahaswamigal instructed Acharyal as to the ways of conduct as
one progressed in the path of yoga. Srimad Bhagavad Gita also vividly
defines the state of a sthitaprajna.


Having said this, the very question as to how to conduct etc arise out
of ignorance. One need not feel ashamed of that. But has to conquer
that. How? Sri Gita Acharyan says in chapter 6

asa.nshayaM mahaabaaho mano durnigraha.n chalam.h .
abhyaasena tu kaunteya vairaagyeNa cha gR^ihyate

Practice is the key to perfection. It is not handwaving. Just as we
learnt formulae in smaller classes to calculate volume of a cube/cone
etc and as we graduated knew their derivations through calculus, it
suffices to follow the path of practice (swadharma) as imparted by our
scriptures which will automatically elevate us to live the life of a
sthitaprajna.

Our swadharma anushtanams teach us all parts of yoga. Doing it
meticulously with the object of satisfying the lord is bhakti yoga.
Offering the fruits that acrue out of them to the Lord is karma yoga.
For example, even in Sandhyavandanam, we are prompted to meditate
"brahmaivaahamasmi"  after offering arghyam. Because contemplating on
the brahman is swadharma. And this jnana yoga. So practice of
swadharma lead us to discrimination of the truth and relative truth
and otherwise.


One has to acquire the adhikara sampath to contemplate on the supreme
Self. Sadhan chatushtaya is a necessary condition for succeeding.

Satsangham is definitely aid in acquiring the above mentioned wealth
by the guru's grace. Shraddha (implicit faith in the words of the guru
and sastram) are pre-requisites to all of them.

sadguro sharanam.
Prasanna





On 7/23/07, Shrinivas Gadkari <sgadkari2001 at yahoo.com> wrote:
> Namaste,
>
> One possible approach is: Based on one's undesrtanding
> of charitra of shrI rAma, or shrI kRSNa, one can ask
> what would they do in such an event, may be
> they would "inspire our intellect". After all this
> is one of the important goals that maharSi vAlmiki,
> and maharSi vyAsa have shought to achieve through
> their works - practical demonstration of theory.
>
> Regards,
> Shrinivas
>
>
> ----------------------------------------------------
>
> Now, tell me,  should I carry that sad feeling to
> my house & by narrating the whole episode to my wife
> (who does not even know the name of my departed
> friend)
> &  making her  also to grieve along with me & ruin the
>
> whole happy atmosphere at home??  or should I leave
> all my sorrows as soon as I comeout from the
> crematorium & enjoy the evening movie with my wife &
> kids with ice creams & pop corns ??
>
> What would be the attitude/mental state  of a real
> vairAgi in these *real life* situations??  Whether he
> will just *act * (or pretend) according to the demands
>
> of life *situation/circumstance*??  like,looking sad
> & weepy guy at the cremation of his friend  & looking
> joyful, wonderfully happy  husband when he is with
> family !!  Or,  should he wear an apathetic,  granite
> face with *no* feeling at all in both these
> situations?? which is the right & appropriate mental
> state here for a real vairAgi ??
>
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
> bhaskar
>
>
>
>
> ____________________________________________________________________________________
> Get the free Yahoo! toolbar and rest assured with the added security of spyware protection.
> http://new.toolbar.yahoo.com/toolbar/features/norton/index.php
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>



-- 
Thanks and regards

Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas
Mobile: +91-99002 17109
Phone:+91-80-233 69953

