+++
title = "129 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2006-10-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017628.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017628.html)

Namaste all

It has meant a real fulfillment to me to have been blessed by the Lord
and the Guru ParamparA  in that the project started in September 2005
has come to a conclusion now with the final post that appears today. 

In this work I have been encouraged and helped by many of the members of
this Group. It has also been a great challenging education in
spirituality for me.  I think I have benefited most from this
translation attempt. My thanks and gratitude to one and all. I am sure
all students  of advaita vedanta would find in it the A to Z of what it
means to be a practising seeker on the advaita track.

For the convenience of the members and of future readers of this
sAdhanA, the entire document of Advaita Saadhanaa from the beginning to
the end  has been uploaded as a single pdf document on the  files
section of 'advaitin'. 

It is still not a perfect document in the sense there is much more
editorial work necessary, though mostly in terms of the formatting of
the English transliteration of Sanskrit words. I shall continue working
at it and come back with a revised complete document properly edited
(and indexed, if possible), maybe in a few weeks' time. Any suggestion
towards the improvement of the  formatting  and proper indexing of the
document  is welcome; but please write to me offline. Thanks.

PraNAms to all seekers of truth.
PraNAms to the Mahaswamigal.
profvk


