+++
title = "82 kuntimaddi sadananda"
date = "2005-09-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-September/015051.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-September/015051.html)

I request the moderators of the lists to publisize this appleal for
urgent help for an Indian boy.  Also pass it on to your friends and
families. Thanks.
Hari OM!
Sadananda
-----------------------------------

"Need your generous donations to support a 9 Year old Boy Named "Girish
Sharma"

I am deeply saddened to report the death of our revered Nashville Priest
Sri Suryanarayana Sharma and his wife Smt. Anasuyamma from a tragic
automobile accident on September 12, 2005 in Athens, Alabama. He is
survived by his 9 year old son Girish, who was in his school when this
tragic accident took place in Alabama. Girish had no idea of the death
of both his parents at the same time till about last Thursday.
Yesterday, Sri Ganesha Temple and the Hindu community of Nashville
performed a memorial Service honoring the beloved priest and his wife
followed by a funeral. 

Girish had requested that we send him to India to join the remaining
members of his family in India. He wants to attend his old school. As
you all know, it is a very difficult task for a 9 year old child to deal
with the loss of both his parents as well as deal with the hardships of
life without funds to take care of his needs. I encourage each one of
you to please come forward and help this poor child in need of moral and
financial support. There can not be a greater cause in life than
supporting a small child like this. It was heart breaking to witness
Girish next to his parents Coffins yesterday! It almost appears that
Lord Ganesha loved the priest and his wife so much that he invited them
to his abode sooner than he originally planned and delegated the
responsibility of the child to us. It is our duty to take care of Girish
. Please help him.

Sri Suryanarayana Sharma was born in Hunasenahalli, Kolar District in
the state of Karnataka on November 3, 1964. He received the priesthood
training at Sri Vaidika Dharma Patashala in Bangalore. He worked in
various temples in the state of Karnataka prior to coming to Sri Ganesha
Temple. He was well liked by all the devotees and had the highest
respect for him.

Your donations may be made to Sri Ganesha Temple for " Girish Sharma
Trust Fund" and mail your checks to

Sri Ganesha Temple
P.O. Box 210705
Nashville, TN 37221


Girish would leave for India in about a week after finishing the legal
formalities in USA. He is currently a Greeen Card Holder , but it
appears that he may loose his status as he has no means to support his
permanent Residency . 

So please act fast and mail your checks. Please note that all donations
to Sri Ganesh temple are tax exempt . Dont forget to mention that the
donations are for "GIRISH SHARMA TRUST FUND" 




