+++
title = "44 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2016-09-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042287.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042287.html)

Some Madhvas believe, on the authority of the Sumadhva vijaya, that there
have been a couple of encounters between Madhvacharya and the then pontiff
of Sringeri Maṭha:

http://www.srivyasaraja.org/articles/July11/HISTORICAL%20ANTECEDENTS-%20Part%20IV&V.pdf


http://madhvaparampare.blogspot.in/2010_06_01_archive.html

//Ananda Theertharu defeated many reputed scholars of the Buddhist, Jain
and Advaitic schools in debates and his name began to spread far and wide.
Encouraged by the growing response to his teaching, he undertook his first
tour to Kanyakumari. At Anantapuram (located in the South Arcot District of
Tamilnadu), he is said to have had a bitter debate with the then Sri Sri
Sankaracharya of Sringeri Math, Vidya Theertharu, who was so enraged with
this young ascetic's scholarly arguments that he threatened to break his
Danda (the ascetic's staff). Such encounters with the followers of Sri Sri
Sankaracharya and Srimad Ramanujacharya made him feel the need to write his
own commentary on the Brahmasutras and found a new school of thought rooted
in devotion to the Lord.//

There is also a belief among some Madhvas that Narayana Pandita, a
contemporary of Madhva, the author of the Sumadhva vijaya and Mani Manjari,
belonged to a family of Shivalli Smarthas owing allegiance to the Sringeri
Maṭha.

http://padmanaabh.blogspot.in/2013/12/madhva-vijaya.html

//
Madhva Vijaya
Sri Narayana Pandita was born in Likucha or Pejattaaya family, of Angirasa
Gotra Bhagavata Sampradayam, which has indeed done yeomen service to
Madhwas by writing the Biography of Acharya Madhwa in his life time. He is
the is the author of Sumadhvavijaya, biography of the founder of the Dvaita
school of philosophy, Sri Madhvacharya.

Sri Narayana Panditacharya was the son of Trivikrama Panditacharya, one of
the direct disciples of Sri Madhva. Narayanacharya was born in about 1280
AD, a junior contemporary of Acharya Madhwa.

He was a born poet like his esteemed father: Kalabhaashana eva sooripota:
Kavraaseet anavadyapadya vadee, in his early child hood itself, he used to
compose Shlokas in praise of God, though they were Bhagavata under the
control of Shringeri Mutt. //

All the above events are much pre-Vidyaranya.

A scholar known to me has visited the descendants of Narayana Pandita, in
Mulbagal, Karnataka, who have maintained their smarta identity.

regards
subrahmanian.v
