+++
title = "60 D Gayatri"
date = "2016-09-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042311.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042311.html)

//Sringeri maTh records show these dates of each Acharya:
http://www.sringeri.net/jagadgurus. Those would then be what... random
numbers?! :) //


A record is as good or as bad as its source. Can you please tell me what is
the source for these dates? Is it a manuscript? Is it an inscription? Are
there any old manuscripts or inscriptions before 14th century CE, which
talk of the Sringeri Matha? Are there any external independent accounts
before 14th century CE that testify to the existence of Sringeri Matha?
Surely, it must have received grants from kings. Are there records of such
grants before 14th century CE to the Sringeri matha? Does Shankara say
anywhere in his authentic bhAshyas that he established mathas? Or do his
disciples say so?


//For some reason, the living tradition of Sringeri shows the times of the
peeThAdipati, which is "belief", but Hacker's so-called findings are
research that is perfect!//

You are not properly reading my messages. I acknowledged Hacker may not be
perfect, but do you have anything better to offer as evidence for your
claims? If you have, you are welcome to counter Hacker. I have no personal
affinity to his theories.


//FYI, the great grandfather of a friend of mine wrote a bhUmikA in a
publication on Brahmasutra bhAshya which mentions the varsha, tithi and
muhurtA in which Sringeri Acharyas took sannyAsa!//

And may I know on what sources he based his information?


On Saturday, 3 September 2016, Praveen R. Bhat <bhatpraveen at gmail.com>
wrote:

> Namaste,
>
> Why is what Hacker gains or loses a relevant question, but what it would
> amount to mean not? Sringeri maTh records show these dates of each Acharya:
>
