+++
title = "177 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2009-08-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022273.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022273.html)

Namaste:

after all, who destroyed kshtriiya's ? Was it notparashuraam who vowed to destroy kshtria for not just once but 21 times !!?

When are we going to take the responsibility and call spade a spade and admit that our ancestor were napu~sakacould not defend their own territory, family and now Sanskrit language, which is being studied by Western scholars more systematically than in India. When are we going to wake up and accept our inadequacy's & deficiencies. Remember we cannot charge what we cannot acknowledge.However,, if oneprefer to hide behind smapradaaya that istheir individualchoice and that cannot be beneficial to larger society.

All of our sages, including Acharys left their individual smsaara and created a larger smasaara for the benefit of all Indians. That is practicing "advaita" not just discussing it. Just discussing "ghaTa and ghaTaakaaSha and mR^ittaka" or "suvarNa and its jewelery" is just from the saadhaka point of view but soon that needs to change in to it's utility the real purpose.After ghata realizing that it is mR^ittkaa should that ghaTa commit suicide and recognize it's utility for a larger purpose of storage for it's users ? Can a gold bar be used as a jewelery by a lady to accentuate her beauty ?

May be you do not have a desire to think of application of out traditions andabout its implication to larger mases but that is your choice.Acharys gave us the most elegant scientific tool of "neti - neti" for evaluating the truth but when are we going to use it ?

Regards,

Dr. Yadu

/09, Satish Arigela <satisharigela at yahoo.com> wrote:


From: Satish Arigela <satisharigela at yahoo.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Ref request for somnath
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Sunday, August 23, 2009, 10:12 PM





So the blame is shifted to kShatriya's now. :)

Rgds
sa.






