+++
title = "28 N.Seshan"
date = "2004-06-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013126.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013126.html)

Hi

these terms, bindu naada etc could be measurements of time like sec, micro 
sec.. Muthuswamy dikshitar uses something similar in this Anandabhairavi 
kriti " thyaagaraja Yoga Vaibhavam" if I remmeber correctly... See if you 
can check any ancient time realted terminology. It is just a hunch,, or 
ask any decent astrologer friend if you hav, whether these are 
subdivisions of the HOra.. SOrry If I am wrong...

Rgds/Seshan


 . >Today's Topics:
>
>   1. Re: bindu-nAda-kalAtItaH (Subrahmanian,	Sundararaman V)
>   2. gitapress.org (M. S. Ravisankar)
>   3. Shata-shlokI of Shankara - 1,2 of 101 (V. Krishnamurthy)
>
>
>----------------------------------------------------------------------
>
>Message: 1
>Date: Tue, 1 Jun 2004 11:49:09 -0400
>From: "Subrahmanian,	Sundararaman V"
>	<sundararaman.v.subrahmanian at citigroup.com>
>Subject: [Advaita-l] Re: bindu-nAda-kalAtItaH
>To: "adavita_l" <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
>Message-ID:
>	<534FBBDE60BAD411814C00508BE3A710174E0FC0 at exchny34.ny.ssmb.com>
>Content-Type: text/plain;	charset=3D"iso-8859-1"
>
>Sri Ravisankar:
>
>Thank you for your explanation.  I will try what you suggested.
>
>
>
>Sri Ravishankar Venkataraman:
>
>This comes in the simple stotram on Guru that we teach children. =20
>
>chaitanya(H) shAshvata(H) shAntO vyOmAtItO niranjanaH |
>bindu-nAda-kalAtItaH tasmai shri gurave namaH ||
>
>I was reciting this to my daughter.  As I was reciting, it occured to me =
>that I should understand the meaning.  These days children ask a lot of q=
>uestions.  If I can't give good explanations and if they find that I am m=
>echanically repeating, I am afraid that they may not take to it.  So, now=
> I am trying to understand everything I (plan to) teach my children! - th=
>at's in brief the genesis of the question.
>
>Regards,
>SVS
>
>
>------------------------------
>
> 



