+++
title = "134 Vaidya N. Sundaram"
date = "1998-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-August/009351.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-August/009351.html)

28)
 aha.nkaaraadidehaantaan.h bandhaanaGYaanakalpitaan.h .
 svasvaruupaavabodhena moktumichchhaa mumukshutaa ..

 MumukshutA is the desire to free the mind from the bonds extending from
the ahankaara to the body created by ajn~aana, by means of knowledge of
one's real nature.

 ahankaara may be understood in two senses. Either it is the reflection of
the antahkarana in the body composed of the eyes etc., producing the ego
sense (aham iti abhimaanah). Thus the ahankaara is the reflection of the
caitanya (intelligence) in the mind (vide sloka 105 - to come later).  Or
ahankaara may refer to the jIva who is the enjoyer of the aanandamayakosa.
This is to be traced to Sri Bhagavatpaada's work SvAtmanirUpana: "The jIva
speaks of himself as being happy by enjoying a bit of happiness in the
state of dreamless sleep. In that condition he is in the aandamayakosa.
That is the ahankaara. How can that ahankaara be the aatma?". Even that is
the product of ajn~aana. They are all secondary as they are the products
of mental activity.
 Hence, the bonds beginning with aanandamaya and including the
vijn~aanamaya, manomaya, prAnamaya and annamayakosas which make one
confuse the aatman with them should all be broken asunder by perfect
knowledge of one's real nature with such efficiency that the sense of
aatman will never more attach to them. The desire to thus get rid of such
bonds is mumukshutaa.


                      Vaidya N. Sundaram
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The place, time, objects and their knower etc., projected in a dream
during sleep are all mithyA (an illusion/false). So too, here. in the
waking state, the world that is seen is a projection by one's own
ignorance. Likewise, this body, the senses, the breath, the ego etc.,
are all unreal. Therefore, That thou art, the peaceful, defectless,
supreme, non-dual Brahman.  -- Adi Shankara in VivekacUdAmani.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

