+++
title = "01 kuntimaddi sadananda"
date = "2008-02-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-February/019765.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-February/019765.html)

A recent discussion on karma yoga and jnaana yoga in advaitin list prompted this write-up.
Hari Om!
Sadananda
---------------------------------------------

                               Karma yoga vs. Jnaana yoga

After elaborate discussion of the laws governing action and results and how one should act by
surrendering all the fruits of actions, Krishna goes into elaborate glorification of jnaana yoga
and how a jnaani or realized person behaves in the society.  Thus, in the end of the second
chapter, Arjuna is provided the knowledge of karma yoga and also how given the taste of how
glorious is the jnaana yoga.  Having gained this knowledge Arjuna wonders why Krishna pushes him
to do karma, involving in his case the terrible act of killing his teaches and relatives. Hence
the discussion of karma vs. jnaana starts in the third chapter  with Arjuna question. 

Essentially Arjuna asks Krishna  Hay Krishna! If, in your opinion, jnaana is better than karma,
why are you commanding me to do this terrible action? Your statements are confusing to me if
jnAna is the direct means for moksha and moksha cannot be the result of any action, then why are
you asking me to follow karma yoga? 

Shankara says  Arjuna clearly understood that karma and jnaana are two distinct paths. Among the
two, Arjuna also understood that jnaana is superior and it is the one that gives him moksha and
not karma yoga.  His confusion is not about whether he should follow some mixture of the two (some
give it with a fancy name Integral yoga, which during Shankaras time is called - jnaana karma
samucchaya) and in what proportions they should be mixed, etc. Shankara says  Arjunas question
pertains to only why he has to follow the inferior karma yoga while Krishna has endorsed that
jnaana is superior which alone takes him to the final goal. Krishnas answer also reinforces
Arjunas understanding that, yes, both are different, and no integral yoga or mixture of the two
is intended.  Krishna is only addressing why Arjuna is qualified to do only karma yoga even though
jnaana yoga is the one what gives moksha. All of us have the same problem.  Should we pursue karma
yoga or jnaana yoga? If we need to switch from the former to the later, when do we have to switch?
Is teacher is going to tell us when to switch or should we have to decide ourselves?  

What yoga to follow depends on the seekers qualifications.  It is like a student asking a
question, should I study high school or go directly to MD course to become doctor? What path I
take depends on the prerequisites that I have. It is not that I have to do a mixture of high
school and MD course together. I can not get to MD courses, even though they are fulfilling to
make me doctor, unless I am prepared to get the prerequisite qualifications.  In principle it does
not matter how I acquire the necessary qualifications, but I need to have them before I enter the
MD courses. Similarly karma yoga and jnaana yoga are in sequence and not simultaneous. Krishna
declares these are two distinct paths and the qualifications for each are different  karma yoga
is the one needed for those whose life styles are tuned to yoga niShTa or yoga of action while
jnaana yoga is for those who life style is tuned to saankhya or jnaana niShTa or yoga of
knowledge.  The two life styles are different.  Karma yoga is prescribed to Arjuna since his life
style is for that. If one studies Uddhava Gita, that is the last message of Krishna, he commands
Uddhava to proceed to Badiri to jnaana niShTa lifestyle. The difference in life styles is more
related to internal mind set than external circumstances. There are four main differences in the
mind-set of a karma yogi vs. jnaana yogi. One can decide where one belongs by examining ones own
mind-set. 

1. Vision of the Goal: 
Karma yogi thinks that he has to gain moksha or looks upon himself as mumukshuH  the one who is
desirous of liberation. Obviously his mind is set to look upon moksha as something to gain or
something to achieve or something to acquire.  He feels that he is bound by samsaara and he wants
liberation, freedom for all problems. His mind has already concluded that liberation is very
difficult to acquire, and is the result of many many lives. One needs Grace of God, prayer, merits
of many lives, etc. Even if teacher says you are already free, the mind set is not prepared to
accept it  it still wants to seek and discover the experience of that freedom. The teaching is
not sufficient; they need to do something to gain that freedom. He wants to experience that self
realization.  He has read that something will happen at that time, and he is longing for that
experience of self-realization. Since nothing is happening, the mind is set to the notion that it
is a along way to go.  Moksha is apraaptasya praaptam, gaining something that one does not have
it yet.  Some even believe or concluded that it will not happen in this life. 

Jnaana yogi: The mind set of jnaana yogi is the recognition that moksha is not something to gain
but some thing to realize or recognize. I am already nitya mukta aatma  ever free from all
problems  freedom is my birth right. Moksha is not something to gain, something to achieve or
something to acquire.  It is praaptasya praaptam gaining something that is already gained. It is
only something to abide in that knowledge.  I am actually free even when I have notion that I am
not free.  Habitual thinking of the mind that I am bound is to be dropped by re-educating the mind
so that it firmly abides in the knowledge that I am ever free. 

2. Attitude towards action: The attitude with respect to action is also different.
Karma yogi: He looks upon karma as saadhana or means to gain moksha as one of the puruShArtha 
last thing that one has to achieve in this life  dharma, artha, kaama and moksha.  Since it is
last, some people postpone it to the last phase of their life; of course the last phase is when
one cannot achieve anything else. First, one has to give up the fruits of actions or give up the
attachments for the results of the action  or offer them to the Lord.  Since Lord is already
full, he cannot take any more (other than bhakti) so karma yogi is stuck with the results that he
cannot give up. Hence he offers every day  tan man subkuch terahi  this body, this mind,
everything is yours. If he is offering everyday or every time aarati is being done, implies that
he has not offered it even once, since he cannot offer the same thing again and again. So giving
up involves not giving the results but giving up the sense of ownership of the results. His
mind-set is still in between  having desire to fulfill and act upon those actions, but want to
give up the results of the action.  Therefore he keeps giving up the results that really do not
belong to him, in the first place.  The reason is he still has the mind-set that he is the doer,
and somebody has to do it, and if he does not do it no body will, and that will be more
frustrating for him. It is this mind set that sets him to do his obligatory duties in life. The
most important part of this mind set is  kartRitva bhaava  I am a doer notion. It is difficult
to have doership notion but give up the enjoyer-ship notion (bhoktRitva bhaava) by offering the
results to Him. This can be done only for obligatory duties and not for desire prompted actions.
He has to do karma yoga until he realizes that there is nothing really for him to do.  
Jnaana yogi: He does not look up karma as saadhana for moksha.  He understood that he is nitya
mukta aatma ever liberated self that does not  look upon action as a means to accomplish
anything, including chitta suddhi or purification of the mind, or do selfless action for moksha
saadhana or means directly or indirectly for moksha. That does not mean he stops all actions and
stays like a stone.  All actions are done under his stewardship with understanding that they are
meant for loka kalyaaNam  for the benefit of the totality  starting from prayer. He contributes
for the benefit of the society in whatever form he can  just prayers, or teaching or actions that
uplift the society. There is no ownership to the results even to give up the results.  Only when I
own I can give up.  Even taking care of the body is only loka kalyaaNam.  Hence all actions will
remain as they are but only the mind-set towards the actions is different.  Hence there is no
anxiety for the results since there are no expectations. He enjoys the beauty of the Lord,
manifesting in every action and every thing that happens or does not happen.   
Thus he has mentally renounced all  the sanyaasa bhavana, feeling of renunciation is firmly
rooted in his mind-set. The reason is simple; he has understood that nothing really belongs to him
to begin with, in order for him to give up.  

3. Moksha or Liberation: The notion about moksha is also different.
Karma yogi: He thinks moksha is something to achieve or to be accomplished.  His prayers and his
saadhana all tuned towards it.  He wants to be blessed  Looks upon Iswara whose blessing he needs
or whose grace is needed to gain moksha  Goes to this temple or that temple  this puja or that
puja for special blessings from gods and goddesses, holy both here or there, this self-less
service or that  all ultimately to gain merits to qualify for moksha.  
Jnaana yogi: Moksha is an accomplished fact since it is ones swaruupam itself  or ones intrinsic
nature. There is really nothing to look for nothing to work for or nothing to do to gain what is
ones nature.  Only the problem he finds is his mind is not firmly abiding in that knowledge due to
habitual thinking. To dissolve the habitual thinking, he keeps redirecting the mind to the fact
that he is not all this but that which pervades all this.  Mind is set in jnaana or knowledge of
the reality as I am that- getting the mind abiding in that knowledge is the essence of his
efforts. 
4. Nature of Bhakti: The attitude of bhakti towards Iswara is also different.
Karma yogi: His bhakti or devotion towards the Lord is sakaama bhakti - devotion towards the Lord
as giver of fruits of actions -  even though desire are reduced but not totally eliminated.  The
desires could be different  desire for heath  desire for freedom from limitations at body, mind
and intellect level  ultimately the desire for liberation or moksha.  Most of the self-fish
desires are reduced but not totally eliminated.  
Jnaana yogi:  sakaama bhakti is renounced.  All prayer centered on I and mine are renounced since
they are related to body, mind and intellect equipments. He invokes God or Iswara not to gain
something but seeing His presence everywhere. Only desire is to abide in himself or in Godhood
the truth that is of the nature of sat-chit-ananda swaruupam. Hence pulling the mind back to its
source or to Himself is his full time workless work. His prayers are nishkaama or no self-centered
desires.  His prayers may end in himself as the goal of the very prayer  nothing to ask but just
BE, where the desiring mind has become silent. He becomes a nitya sannyaasi  who has giving up
even the giving up.  

As the mind becomes calmer, karma yoga gradually moves towards the jnaana as the Vedanta teaching
sinks into his mind more and more firmly. Reinforcement of the knowledge slowly becomes the major
fulltime job for a jnaana yogi until he becomes one with it.  

The notes are based on Swami Paramaarthanandaji recent discourse on Shankara BhAShya on Gita. 






