+++
title = "140 venkat krishnan"
date = "2004-01-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-January/012627.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-January/012627.html)

Dear Sri Krishnamurthy,

Thanks a lot for your reply. As before, I have a few doubts. Please do 
clarify.
1) Aparoksha JnaNa -This is knowledge of what ? The doubt is because, 
supposing a person does experience the Brahman, then theoretically speaking, 
how does the person himself even know that he has experienced Brahman ?  
Have Sri Shankara or Sri Ramana decribed their experience of moksha though 
any prose or works?

2) What did Sri Shankara mean when he said the"world has no existence" ? Was 
he denying the world per say, or did he just mean that its 
temporary/ephemeral(but real all the same) ? Did he just mean that the 
everlasting soul is permanent while the BMI is not, but the BMI is real all 
the same.
Wouldnt it also attribute a desire on the part of Brahman to exhibit 
variegated-ness vis-a-vis the real axistence of a material world??
Continuing the line of questioning , if the material world is real(even 
though ephemeral) and if we accept the Vedas as the breadth of "God", and 
also that the Vedas exist for our own benefit, wouldn't that attribute 
kindness on the part of Brahman ?

quote--
"Brahma and Vishnu and Shiva are only physical manifestations of the 
Absolute Reality that is brahman.  Just as you and I are. Except that, they 
not only know they are such manifestations but can switch back and forth to 
their Brahman-being and their physical forms. Except that, they not only 
know they are such manifestations but can switch back and forth to their 
Brahman-being and their physical forms. Theoretically, this is the answer. 
But to the question: whether they exist, like you and me existing, I have 
no answer except to tell you that great people like Shankara have behaved as 
if they exist. That is enough of a proof for me as far as question 1 is 
concerned. "
unquote--
3) "Sri Shankara behaved that "they" existed", is the reason I got the doubt 
in the first place.
For, there is a certainly a difference between "Behaved" and believed". I'll 
take it to be believed, since you say that is proof of their existence. But 
the question now arises, if you say "they existed", what do you mean by 
"they". For aren't Vishnu,Brahma etc the very Brahman..if they are, then 
what does the plurality of names/forms suggest?
   If you say that these are manifestations of Brahman(and which are 
conscious of that), which can switch back and forth from Brahman being, 
wouldn't that attribute action to Brahman ?

These questions have been posed not in the mood of an arguement/debate, but 
strictly to clear my own doubts. So kindly do answer them.

sincerely
krishnan

_________________________________________________________________
Games, MMS cards, ringtones. Operator logos, picture messages & more. 
http://server1.msn.co.in/sp03/mobilesms/ Jazz up your mobile!

