+++
title = "128 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2006-01-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015662.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015662.html)

Namste:

  I do not know thw exact thing what you are looking for  but I am aware of similar thoughts expressed in bhaagavata puraaNa.

  Atmano gururAtmaiva puruShasya visheShataH 
  yat pratyakShAnumAnAbhyAM shreyo.asAvanuvindate || bhaagavata puraaNa 11.7.20 ||

  Meaning - The "aatmaa" itself is indeed the one's own guide, especially in the case of man, direct perception and inference he can work out his own good.


  yadu avadhuuta saMvaada | santi me guravo rAjanbahavo buddhyupashritAH | yato buddhimupAdAya mukto.aTAmIha tA.nshR^iNu || 1107033 ||
  pR^ithivI vAyurAkAshamApo.agnishchandramA raviH | kapoto.ajagaraH sindhuH pata~Ngo madhukR^idgajaH ||1107034||
  madhuhA hariNo mInaH pi~NgalA kuraro.arbhakaH | kumArI sharakR^it sarpa UrNanAbhiH supeshakR^it ||1107035 ||
  ete me guravo rAjanchaturviMshatirAshritAH | shikShA vR^ittibhireteShAmanvashikShamihAtmanaH ||1107035 ||


  Meaning - Please listen to the many of my preceptors as selected from my keen senses acquiring wisdom from whom I wonder in the world as being free. The Earth, Air, the Moon, and the Sun, the Dove, the boa-constrictor, the Sea, the Moth, the honey-bee, the Elephant, the Honey-gatherer, the Deer, the Fish, Pingalaa ( a courtesan), the Osprey, an Infant, the Maiden, the Forger of arrows, the Serpent, the Spider, and a Bhrnga (a Wasp).

  Ultimately, "The Guru is in You" all you need to do is recognize it and follow his guidance.  IMO - There is nothing more practical advaitic than this.

  Hope this helps.

  Best wishes,

  Dr. Yadu


Guy Werlings <werlings.guy at wanadoo.fr> wrote:
  namaste |



A few days ago, I read somewhere on the Internet:



"There is a story in the AvadhUta GItA which talks of the AvadhUta who 
stopped at a wayside inn and was asked by the innkeeper, "What is your 
teaching?" He replied, "There is no teacher, no teaching and no one taught." 
And then he walked away."




---------------------------------
Yahoo! Photos
 Got holiday prints? See all the ways to get quality prints in your hands ASAP.

