+++
title = "88 Dr. S.R.Marur"
date = "1999-09-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-September/010894.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-September/010894.html)

Though the wrong notion that advaitins are saivaites has gained
currency, the opinion that 'advaitA alone is the complete (pUrna)
vEda matham' had also been present, particularly after the
establishment of various siddhAnthAs by the later day AchAryAs, which
differed from advaita. The continuation of the common title -
smArthAs, only for the advaitins [*till today*] is a proof of this.

The root meaning of the word 'smArthA' is neither 'the one who had
adopted advaita siddhAnthA' nor 'the one who follows ShankarA'. But,
it refers to the one who follows the completely 'vEdic smrithis'
(dharma shAstrAs). Similarly, the surnames such as 'sharmA, shastry'
etc have continued only for smArthAs.

Even from the shAstric works, which were in vogue long before theadvent
of AchAryAl, it becomes known that 'sharmA' is referring to
the bhramin caste. It is a tradition from vEdic times to refer to
a bhramin as 'sharmA' and a kshatriyA as 'varmA'. If we say that
there was a painter by name Ravi VarmA, then it implies that he was a
kshatriyA.

Even now, when a bhramin boy prostrates, after his upanayanam, by
telling his vEdic sAkhA, sUthrA and gOthrA, we ask, "what is [*your*]
sharman?". Even he tells his name as 'such and such sharman'. This
is applicable even for iyengArs and mAdhwAs.

But, the one who always uses this 'sharma' as a surname, indicative
of his caste, will invariably be an advaitin. This shows that he is
the only complete (pUrna) follower of vEdic matham. 'ShAstry' means
the 'one who follows shAstrA-s'. [*The word*] ShastrA refers only to
vEda-dharma shAstrA-s. Even this is used as a surname only by the
advaitic smArthA.

As an exception, either a mAdhwA or a Vaishnavaite may rarely have
'sharmA' as his surname. But, in general, by the mere mention of
names such as 'D.S. Sarma' and 'Right Honourable Shastry', we infer
that these [*persons*] are only smArthAs.


                                .... to be continued

Regards,

Sudhakar

----------------------------------------------------------------
Translated from,
HH Sri Chandhra sEkharEndhra Saraswathi Swamiji, 'Sankara
SampradhAyam'. Deivathin Kural (in Tamil), Vol. II, Second
Edition, ed. rA. Ganapathi, Vanathi padhippagam, Chennai,
pp: 119-157 (1980).
---------------------------------------------------------------

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

