+++
title = "02 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2009-01-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-January/021074.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-January/021074.html)

Jaishankar Narayanan

I am a disciple of Swami Dayananda Saraswati of Arsha Vidya Gurukulam. I have
studied with Pujya Swamiji as a Residential Student. I am now residing in
Chennai . I teach Vedanta and Sanskrit to interested people.


Bhaskara Sahukar

I am a 'Rugvedi', a devotee of Dakshinamnaya Peetham at Sringeri (Sringeri
Sharada Peetham), Chikkamagalur District, Karnataka, India.  I am also
devotee of Sree Sree Sree Ravishankar Guruji and doing Sadhana of Sudarshana
Kriya and Pranayama.  I have learnt on my own with the help of several
CD/DVDs the following Veda Mantras : Sree Ganeshatharvasheersha, Rudra -
Namaka and Chamaka, Purusha Sookta, Shree Sooktha, Narayana Sookta, Durga
Sookta, Mantra Pushpam. And also learning 'Soundarya Lahari' and 'Lalitha
Sahasra Nama'. Our Kulapurohit Sri Suryanarayana Jois is guiding me in this
regard. And I am having CDs of many 'Pravachanas' such as
'Eashavasyopanishad', 'Soundarya Lahari', 'Rudra' etc and frequently
listening in leisure hours.  I am working as a Software Engineer - mainly
playing roll as Data Base Administrator(ORACLE), System Designer, Developer
in Oracle Platform.  In leisure hours, I am also studying multimedia
softwares such as Macromedia Flash, 3D Max Studio etc with the intention of
creating awareness and interest in Hindu Vedantha particularly Advaitha
Siddhantha.


Karthikeya Venkatesan

Hello,
Let me introduce myself. My name is karthikeya venkatesan... from
Coimbatore. I belong to smarta tradition. Our family has traditionally  been
doing Lord Dakshinamirthi upasana and Sri Chakra puja. Presently,I am 
livingin Georgia.

I hope to understand more about Sankara's philosophy and how it applies to
everyday life.

Thank you!


-- 
Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>

