+++
title = "35 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2008-05-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020057.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020057.html)

Namaskar:

  It is unfortunate that we, the Indians like  to make things more mystique that they need to be,  This give opportunity for Western scholars to have a field day with the issues and poke holes.  We love make thing more ancient than they may be and every one tries to incarnate their guru to a well known deity or a sage.

  Just by making the bold statements does not elevate the teacher or his disciple, except for satisfying the false ego.

  If you had said that that Samarth Ramdas Swami needs be regarded as being analogous to Sage yaaj~navalka may be more suitable.  Because Ramadas Swami emphasized the practical aspects and the associated utility to make life more meaningful.

  abhakta to bhakta navhe, bhakta to vibhaka navhe
  vicaareviiNa kaahiica navhe, samaadhaaana ||

  tasmata vicaara karaava, deva koNa to voLakhaaava
  aaapalya aapaNa shodha ghjyaavaa, antrayaamii ||

  Just my $0.02

  Best wishes,

  Dr. Yadu


Shrinivas Gadkari <sgadkari2001 at yahoo.com> wrote:
  Namaste Dr. Yadu,
I do not have any wrriten evidence on this. I have heard this in
pravachans of a very authoritative sadguru in Mumbai.
(I do not wish to reveal too many details about any specific
sadguru on this forum).
With regards,
Shrinivas
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Namaskar Gadkari:

  Can you please provide any specific reference about this claim ?

  Thanks

  Dr. Yadu


____________________________________________________________________________________
Be a better friend, newshound, and 
know-it-all with Yahoo! Mobile. Try it now. http://mobile.yahoo.com/;_ylt=Ahu06i62sR8HDtDypao8Wcj9tAcJ
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
Be a better friend, newshound, and know-it-all with Yahoo! Mobile.  Try it now.

