+++
title = "169 Amuthan Arunkumar R"
date = "2005-02-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-February/014113.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-February/014113.html)

namo nArAyaNAya 

dear list members,

first of all, let me mention that i'm still a freshie
in advaita, so please excuse me if my questions are
silly...and one more clarification : in the argument
presented below, i'm not trying to refute the
existence of an ISvara, but rather asking for a
rational justification of it based on the axioms of
advaita vedanta.

as far as i understand, according to advaita vedAnta,
jN.Ana and karma don't go together, i.e, once the
brahman is realized mAyA no longer exists. now, if an
ISvara exists, He must have a simultaneous knowledge
of His own nature i.e brahman, and the universe i.e.
mAyA. this doesn't seem to fit into the general scheme
of advaita (a closely related question is : how can a
world exist at all for a jN.Ani?, to put it in other
words, is not a "jIvanmukta" a self-contradictory
statement?)

in case i didn't get my point through, i'd like to
give a more precise statement of the problem. below, i
quote from SrI rAmAnujAcArya's commentary on
SrImadbhagavadgItA, 2.12:

"...ajN.Anakr.ta bhedadr.shTivAde tu, paramapurushasya
paramArthadr.shTe: nirviSesha kUtastha nityacaitanya
AtmayAthAtmyasAkshAtkArAt, nivr.ttAjN.AnatatkAryatayA
ajN.Anakr.ta bhedadarSanam, tanmUla: upadeSAdi
vyAvahArA: na ca samgacchante | 

...advaitajN.Anena bAdhitam bhedajN.Anam
anuvartamAnamapi, mithyArthavishayatvaniScayAt, na
upadeSadi pravr.ttihetu: bhavati |

...iha tu, bhedajN.Anasya savishayasya sakAraNasya
apAramArthikatvena vastu yAtAtmyajN.AnavinashTatvAt na
kathamcidapi bAdhitAnuvr.tti: sambhavati | atha:
sarveSvarasya idAnIntanaguruparamparAyA: ca
tatvajN.Anam asti ced bhedadarSana tatkArya: upadeSadi
asambhava: | bhedadarSanam asti iti ced, ajN.Anasya
tad heto: sthitatvena ajN.atvAdeva sutarAmupadeSo na
sambhavati |"

the argument that the jN.Ani-s, i.e. jIvanmukta-s have
a SarIra due to prArabda karma is also refuted in the
above argument given by SrI rAmAnujAcArya:

please let me know any possible explanation of this
problem as soon as possible.

hari sarvatra,
aparyAptAmr.ta:

=====
Amuthan Arunkumar R,
Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras.

Address : 327, Tapti Hostel, IIT Madras.

Ph : 9840482709

________________________________________________________________________
Yahoo! India Matrimony: Find your life partner online
Go to: http://yahoo.shaadi.com/india-matrimony

