+++
title = "379 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2011-07-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028220.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028220.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Example rAmAnuja or some vaiShNava being an avatAra of something in the 
viShNu 
parivAra etc.

>  sri vaishNava-s believe that Sri rAmAnujAchArya is the avatAra of Adi 
shesha ( the serpent bed of maha vishNu)

The shaiva-s can also claim one of their AchArya-s as an incarnation of 
shiva...so on and so forth.

>  allama prabhu, a jangama from lingayata lineage is incarnation of 
kUdala saMgama deva (parashiva), so is the belief of some shiva sharaNa-s 
in ligAyata circle. 

These things are to be treated as a respectful way of acknowledging the 
greatness of their sAmpradAya's AchArya-s.

>  Yes, you are right..for that matter, We, the followers of Sri SSS's 
teachings, say among ourselves that Sri SSS is 'abhinava shankara' an 
incarnation of shankara bhagavatpAda in Karnataka..And we are comfortable 
with this belief & freely endorse this view point without any hesitation. 
But at the same time, we know that outside our circle, nobody would buy 
this theory :-))

So is shiva saying one thing to the shaiva-s in one avatAra and another 
thing to 
some smArta-s in a different avatAra? Or perhaps shiva and viShNu don't 
agree 
with each other and take human forms to teach their own versions?

>  if their attitude itself is different from one avatAra to another (like 
rAma & krishna) we can expect the difference in teaching as well in 
different avatAra-s..is it not:-))

So it is not correct to take such claims far and come up with reasoning 
for why 
some AchArya x or y is an avatAra of this or that devata. I don't know 
what is 
acheived by doing that.

>  I think, by treating their respective Acharya-s as an incarnation of 
almighty, they have good reason to worship them...gurubrahma, gururvishNu, 
gurudevO maheshvaraH..he is sAkshAt parabrahma.  I dont think there is any 
harm in this belief system until they get into fight with another group 
with this faith. 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
