+++
title = "381 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028213.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028213.html)

If this the Prabhu's leela, all this repetition should be boring.

regards,
Sarma.

On Wed, Jul 20, 2011 at 5:39 PM, shyam Subramanian <shyam_md at yahoo.com>wrote:

> PranAms
> The Vedas are not only coval with Creation and are also Eternal - beyond
> Time, the latter itself being a creation alone. Hence there is no question
> of the Vedas being before or after anything.
>
> In every cycle of Creation Lord Narayana's Grace will manifest in the form
> of a KrishnaArjuna samvAda, as will Lord DakshinamUrthy's Grace in the form
> of Shankara BhagawatpAda.- finding these, and other, transcendent
> personalities mentioned in the VedAs is hence quite appropriate.
>
> Hari OM
> Shri Gurubhyo namah
> Shyam
>
> On Jul 20, 2011, at 12:18 AM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ<
> dvnsarma at gmail.com> wrote:
>
> > An interesting post. But Sankara's birth is later to vedas therefore we
> > cannot expect
> > a reference to him in the vedas either covertly or overtly.
> > Such things are like Bacon's signatures in Shakespeare's dramas.
> >
> > regards,
> > Sarma.
> >
> > On Tue, Jul 19, 2011 at 12:12 PM, Venkata sriram P
> > <venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>wrote:
> >
> >> Namaste Anselmo,
> >>
> >> Inspite of my several posts on “suhastaH”, it seems all the
> >> Mails are getting spammed.  Hence, a new thread on
> >> “suhastaH”.
> >>
> >> I forgot to reply regarding the Atmananda's interpretation
> >> of the word "suhasta".  You have rightly pointed out that Atmananda
> >> interprets this as "sankaracharya".
> >>
> >> Let us see the mantra in original first:
> >>
> >> upahavyE sudhugAm dhEnuM etAM
> >> suhastO godhug uta dohad enAM
> >> shrEShTaM savaM savitA sAvisan no
> >> bhiddho gharmas tad u su pra vocham .......26
> >>
> >> The explanation runs as:
> >>
> >> I call hither the cow easy to milk. And the one who
> >> can milk a cow with "dextrous hand" has milked her.
> >> May the Sun inspire us with the noblest inspiration.
> >> The oven is kindled.  This verily i speak out.
> >>
> >> There is another interpretation:
> >>
> >> I invoke this milch cow which gives plenty of milk that the milk-man
> >> with "deft hands" may milk her.  May Savitr grant us this
> >> excellent milk (for our soma yaga).  The pravargya (sacrifice)
> >> is lighted.  Therefore i earnestly pray.
> >>
> >> Here, "suhasta" is taken as dextrous hands of the milk man who
> >> is milking the cow (kAmadhEnu).
> >>
> >> Shri Atmananda interprets the Cow (dhEnu) to be Veda (shruti) and
> >> compares the Milk Man with Sankara because it is Sankara
> >> who gave prasthAna traya bhAshyAs (the Milk) which is the
> >> essence of vedas.  So, if the vedas are cows, then the
> >> prasthanatrayas bhashyas are the milk and the Sankaracharya
> >> is the milk man who has "dextrous hands".
> >> While interpreting this, Atmananda deciphers a code
> >> in this mantra which is quite interesting to note.
> >>
> >> suhastaH> sukhahastaH > sukhakaraH > sankaraH
> >>
> >> hastaH denote the arms that indicate action. su implies sukhaM (bliss
> >> etc.).
> >> So, su replaced with sukha. hastaH replaced with karaH (arms).
> >> "su" also means "saM" and karaH when joined with "saMkaraH".
> >> Who is none other than Sankara Bhagavatpada.
> >>
> >> regs,
> >> sriram
> >>
> >> _______________________________________________
> >> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> >> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >>
> >> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> >> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >>
> >> For assistance, contact:
> >> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> >>
> > _______________________________________________
> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >
> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >
> > For assistance, contact:
> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

