+++
title = "231 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2014-01-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-January/036371.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-January/036371.html)

If by "enlightenment" you mean, you get something new or you become
something new, most of the seers deny that. U.G.Krishnamurti said that he
ultimately started questioning the search for enlightenment. It appears all
seeking must cease including the seeking of enlightenment. After all you
do not know what enlightenment is in order to seek it. For most of us
enlightenment is a grandiose extension of our mundane desires. Anything
that is newly acquired can be lost in course of time. Any becoming can lead
to unbecoming.

रसवर्जं रसो2प्यस्य परं दृष्ट्वा निवर्तते।। गीता

regards,
Sarma.


On Sat, Jan 25, 2014 at 8:18 PM, Suresh <mayavaadi at yahoo.com> wrote:

> Friends,
>
> I am not attacking any teacher, just a general doubt.
>
> People often say 'this man is enlightened' or 'she became enlightened
> after doing this sadhana' etc. etc. Basically, they're referring to some
> 'big experience' that the person concerned has had - they don't refer to
> book knowledge such as tat twam asi or aham brahmasmi. When they use the
> word 'enlightenment', they go way beyond knowledge and point to some sort
> of radical experience.
>
>
> But isn't this misleading? There couldn't possibly be an experience of the
> nondual Brahman - there is no subject or object. Whatever we experience is
> going to be reduced to the three states like waking etc. The 4th is not a
> state but more like a basis of three states, so that isn't something one
> can experience, especially not in our current state with body/mind.
>
>
> So what exactly is this enlightenment, and why do people speak of it in
> terms of experience (which implies duality)?
>
> Thanks.
> Suresh
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

