+++
title = "100 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043647.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043647.html)

Namaste Sri Praveen Ji,



Reg  << There are only two reasons to take sannyAsa: one due to आत्मानं
वेदितुम् इच्छा विविदिषा desire to know the self, and the other due to
आत्मानं वेत्ति जानाति इति विद्वत् being knower of the self.>>,



Not so. There are four categories of sanyasa namely  कुटीचक, बहूदक , हम्स ,
परमहम्स (kuTIchaka, bahUdaka,  hamsa,  paramahamsa). All the four involve
karmasanyAsa. Of these हम्स and  परमहम्स (hamsa and paramahamsa) fall under
the विविदिषा (vividishA) category. They are recommended only after a
sAdhaka acquires sAdhanachatushtaya.


But the other two कुटीचक and  बहूदक (kuTIchaka and bahUdaka) are for
sAdhakAs who are yet to acquire sAdhanachatushtaya but are still desirous
of taking to sanyasa, being averse to worldly activities. They practice
sAdhanas which lead them to acquire sAdhanachatushtaya. This also involves
karmasanyAsa. It is this sanyasa which Sri Krishna elaborates upon in BG Ch
5 and compares with karmayoga. For reasons explained therein, Sri Krishna
recommends karmayoga as the preferable path though both lead the sAdhaka to
become an adhikAri for Brahmavidya. Obviously Sri Krishna does not conclude
that karmayoga is superior to विविदिषा (vividishA) sanyAsa which leads the
sAdhaka directly to jnAna.



Though not relevant to your post, it may be pertinent to recognize and
recall that BG is commented upon by a very large number of commentators
from various standpoints. It is only to be expected that their
interpretations would vary considerably. What I have mentioned here is from
the standpoint of advaita sidhanta as advanced by Sri Bhagavatpada.



Regards

>
