+++
title = "178 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2017-10-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047148.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047148.html)

The Kadamba origin - Shiva-Supreme for Vaidika-s

The Tālagunda pillar inscription is an epigraphic record in Sanskrit giving
an account of the Kadamba dynasty. It was set up in the time of the Kadamba
king Śāntivarma (c. 455-60).

This famous inscription, carved vertically on the shaft of the pillar,
opens with praise to Sthāṇu i.e. Śiva and recounts the foundation of
Kadamba power by Mayūraśarma. This family of Brāhmaṇas, who belonged to
Mānavyagotra, are said to have acquired the name Kadamba from a Kadamba
tree near their home. Mayūraśarma went to Pallavendrapurī (i.e. Kāñcī) with
his teacher Vīraśarma to complete his studies. Because of a quarrel at the
time of a horse-sacrifice (aśvamedha) orangised for the Pallava king where
the Brāhmaṇas were not treated with proper respect by the Kṣatriyas,
Mayūraśarma became enraged and, taking up the sword, took refuge in
Śrīparvata.From there harassed the Pallava frontier and levied tribute from
Bṛhat Bāṇa and others. The Pallavas eventually acknowledged him as the king
of the country between Aparārṇava (the Western Ocean) and Preharā.
Mayūraśarma's son was Kaṅgavarma, described in the record as "famous in
battle." His son Bhagīratha was the father of Raghu who was a poet and a
scholar. Raghu’s brother was Kākusthavarma (c. 435-55) who "was like the
sun and by means of rays (daughters) caused the lotuses of Gupta and other
royal families to bloom in friendless, eagerness and love." He came to
Sthānakundūru on a hunting expedition and near the temple of Mahādeva who
had been worshipped by Śātakarṇi and others previously, caused a big tank
to be excavated. His son who had three crowns was Śāntivarma. Śāntivarma
caused this inscription to be made. It was composed by the poet Kubja.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda

//Talagunda was earlier known as Sthanagundur and it was an *agrahara* (a
place of learning).[2]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-rice-2> This is the
earliest known *agrahara*found in Karnataka
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karnataka>.[3]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-kamat-3> An inscription
found at Talagunda indicates that 32 Brahmins
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brahmins> were relocated from a place called
Ahichchhatra <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahichchhatra>to Sthanagundur *by
Mukanna (or Trinetra)*, thereby creating an *agrahara*.[2]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-rice-2>[3]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-kamat-3> *Mukanna was an
ancestor of **Mayurasharma <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mayurasharma>,
the founder of the Kadamba Dynasty
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kadamba_Dynasty>*//

//Education was imparted at Talagunda for eight centuries and the subjects
that were taught included vedas <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veda>,
vedanta <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vedanta>, grammar and philosophy.
The Kannada <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kannada> language was taught at
primary level and clothing and food was provided to the students and
teachers.[3 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-kamat-3>//

//A temple dedicated to Pranaveshwara (Hindu
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindu> God Shiva
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shiva>) is located in Talagunda. Next to it
is located a stone slab containing inscriptions. In front of it is a pillar
containing inscriptions in Sanskrit <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanskrit>.
*The pillar inscriptions were written in the mid 5th century CE during the
reign of Śāntivarman (a descendant of **Mayurasharma*
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mayurasharma>).[5]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-poll-5> The author of
this inscription was Kubja, the court-poet of Śāntivarman.[6]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-sirc-6> He engraved the
inscriptions himself to prevent any other engraver from committing
mistakes.//

//The inscriptions indicate that* Mayurasharma, native of Talagunda,**[8]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-native-8> was
accomplished in vaidika <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaidika>* and went
to the Pallava <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pallava> capital, Kanchipuram
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanchipuram> to study scriptures,
accompanied by his guru <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guru> and
grandfather Veerasharama. There, having been humiliated by a Pallava guard
(horseman), in a rage Mayurasharma gave up his Brahminic studies and took
to the sword to avenge his insult.[9]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-avenge-9> The
inscription vividly describes the event thus:
“ That the hand dextrous in grasping the *kusha* grass, fuel and stones,
ladle, melted butter and the oblation vessel, unsheathed a flaming sword,
eager to conquer the earth[10]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-sword-10>[11]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-sword1-11> ”

The inscriptions thus describe *Kadambas as Brahmins turned conquerors and
praise Brahmins as "Gods on earth, and speakers of Sama
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sama_Veda>, Rig
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rig_Veda>and Yajur
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yajur_Veda> Vedas
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veda>".[12]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-fede-12>* The Kadamba
lineage is described as descending from a three-sage line in the Hariti
pravara <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pravaras> and belonging to the
Manavya gothra <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gothra>.[12]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda#cite_note-fede-12>//


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda_pillar_inscription


//The *Tālagunda pillar inscription* is an epigraphic record in Sanskrit
giving an account of the Kadamba
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kadamba_Dynasty> dynasty. It was set up in
the time of the Kadamba king Śāntivarma (c. 455-60).//

// Description and Contents[edit
<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talagunda_pillar_inscription&action=edit&section=3>
]

*This famous inscription, carved vertically on the shaft of the pillar,
opens with praise to Sthāṇu i.e. Śiva and recounts the foundation of
Kadamba power by Mayūraśarma (for this personality see Mayurasharma
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mayurasharma>). This family of Brāhmaṇas,
who belonged to Mānavyagotra,* are said to have acquired the name Kadamba
from a Kadamba tree near their home. Mayūraśarma went to Pallavendrapurī
(i.e. Kāñcī) with his teacher Vīraśarma to complete his studies. Because of
a quarrel at the time of a horse-sacrifice (*aśvamedha*) orangised for the
Pallava <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pallava> king where the Brāhmaṇas
were not treated with proper respect by the Kṣatriyas, Mayūraśarma became
enraged and, taking up the sword, took refuge in Śrīparvata.[6]
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talagunda_pillar_inscription#cite_note-6>//


The verses:

//1 siddham [||] namaś-Śivāya || Jayati
viśvadе[va]-sa[m˙]ghāta-nichit-aikamūrttis-sanātanaḥ
Sthānu(ṇu)r-indu-raśmi-vichchhurita-dyutimaj-jaṭābhāra-maṇḍanaḥ || [1*]
Tam=anu bhūsurā dvija-pravarās=sāma-rg-yajur-vvеda-vаdinaḥ
yat-prasādas=trāyatе nityaṃ bhuvana-trayam pāpmanо bhayāt || [2*] //

Rendered in Devanāgari, the above reads:

सिद्धम् । नमः शिवाय । जयति विश्वदेवसंघातनिचितैकमूर्तिः सनातनः
स्थाणुरिन्दुरश्मिविच्छुरित-द्युतिमज्ज;त्;अभ्;अरमण्डनः ।

तमनु भूसुराः द्विजप्रवराः सामऋग्यजुर्वेदवादिनः यत्प्रसादस्त्रायते नित्यं
भुवनत्रयम् पाप्मनो भयात् ॥

[Accomplished. Obeisance to Shiva. Glorious shines the One Ancient Sthāṇuḥ
(Śiva) splendor with the moon on his locks of hair. Following him the
foremost of brāhmaṇa-s are experts in the lore of the Rg, Yajus and Sāma
veda-s and by whose grace the three worlds are always protected from the
fear of sin.]


At the end are these lines:

//.[32*] Say=iha bhagavatо Bhavaśy=ādi-dеvasya siddhy-ālaye
siddha-gā(ga)ndharvva-rakṣо-gaṇais=sеvitе-vividha-niyama-hоma-dīkṣā-parair=brāh[m]aṇai
snātakai stūyamānе sadā mantra-vādaiś=śubhaiḥ 14
sukṛtibhir=avanīśvarair=ātma-niśśrеyasaṃ prеpsubhis=Sātakarṇy-ādibhiś
śraddhay=ābhyarchchitе//

 स इह भगवतो भवस्यादिदेवस्य सिद्धालये सिद्धगन्दर्वरक्षोगणैः सेविते विविध
नियमहोमदीक्षापरैः ब्राह्मणैः स्नातकैः स्तूयमाने सदा मन्त्रवादैशुभैः ।

सुकृतिभिः अवनीश्वरैः आत्मनिःश्रेयसं प्रेप्सुभिः सातकर्ण्यादिभिः
श्रद्धयाभ्यर्चिते....

In the temple of the Ādideva Bhava (Śiva), who is worshiped by celestials
by the means of several sacirficial rituals by committed brāhmaṇa-s versed
in the Veda-s by incessant auspicious chanting, and by the kings of good
conduct and virtuous deeds who pray for self-liberation, as exemplified by
the devout worship by Sātakarṇi, etc.

Here ends the excerpted part of the inscription in the form of a poetic
text composed by Kubja, a poet. See also:
http://asibengalurucircle.in/inscribed-pillar-talagunda


The following points emerge from the above historical evidences:


   - Lord Shiva was worshiped by the brāhmaṇa-s, vaidika-s, several
   centuries prior to Shankaracharya
   - There were temples dedicated to Lord Shiva as early as the BC period
   - It is noteworthy that Sureshvaracharya in his vārtika refers to
   Shankara as 'bhavanāmabhṛt', one who bears the name of 'Bhava'.
   - Vācaspati Misra in his invocation to the Bhāmatī pays obeisance to the
   eternal Bhava

Om Tat Sat
