+++
title = "13 Venkatraghavan S"
date = "2021-05-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-May/056724.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-May/056724.html)

Namaste,

Shri gurubhyo namah!

शारदा शारदाम्भोजवदना वदनाम्बुजे । सर्वदा सर्वदास्माकं सन्निधिं सन्निधिं
क्रियात् ॥

वक्तारमासाद्य यमेव नित्या सरस्वती स्वार्थसमन्विताऽऽसीत् |
निरस्तदुस्तर्ककलङ्कपङ्का नमामि तं शङ्करमर्चिताङ्घ्रिम् ||

Shankara Jayanti best wishes to all.

Our jagadguru-s have constantly taught us that as followers of Adi Shankara
BhagavatpAda, it is the duty of each and every one of us to remember
BhagavatpAdA and express our gratitude and admiration for the stupendous
service He has performed for humanity.  By extracting the meaning from the
upaniShad-s and expounding upon them in such a lucid manner, AchArya's
bhAShya-s are a veritable kalpavRksha to seekers, for all time.

There is nothing that we as disciples can do to repay the great blessing
that He and our guru paramparA continues to bestow upon us - the only thing
within our power is to worship our guru-s and forever express our gratitude
to Them.

Therefore, using the auspicious occasion of BhagavatpAdAl's jayanti as a
nimittam, an occasion to show our gratitude, I felt that it would be good
to do a short series of talks on BhagavatpAda's brahmasUtra bhAShyam. The
first four sUtra-s or the chatussUtri is considered by learned people to be
a summary of the entirety of vedAnta, and therefore, that was chosen as a
topic to dwell upon and convey my understanding of the bhAShyam.

By no means am I qualified to speak on such a profound topic, however, this
is merely being done to express my love for AchArya and that by undertaking
this, my understanding of the subject improves. I am placing this as a
humble offering at the lotus feet of our Jagadguru and guru paramparA and
seek Their blessings for the well being of the universe.

The talks thus far are available here:
https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLa8zKvyVR9-umX23l8TWkGyVz5mFU4mvJ

We are in the middle of the bhAShya to the fourth sUtra, and hope to
complete it in the next few days.

Kind regards,
Venkatraghavan
