+++
title = "115 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2007-05-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-May/018924.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-May/018924.html)

Nmatse:

  Word turiya occurs in R^igveda in connection with "vaack" ;

  catvaari vaak parimitaa padaani taani vidur braahmaNaa ye maniiShiNaH |
  guhaa triiNi nihitaa ne~N{}gayanti turiiyaM vaaco manuShyaa vadanti || R^igveda 1\.164\.45 ||

  Meaning - Speech is said to have four forms and scholars know them. Three of these forms are not known and thus one cannot comprehend them. Human only know the fourth state as speech vaak)

  When the language got corrupted is said to have left "deva" and went to “asuraa's”.  Probably when grammar rules got established and deva promised vaak that in the future human will not distort it anymore, then "vaak" returned to the devaaloka (tai. brahm. 6.5.19).  May be that is why sanskR^ita remains one of the least corrupted languages.

  In my view, what our ancestors have said is correct but have we understood it correctly or not is the question!?

  naiSha sthaNoraparaadho yadenamandho na pashyati | puruShaaparaadhaH sa bhavati ||  nirukta 1.16 ||

  Meaning - If a blind man does not see the pillar in his path then it is not the fault of the pillar but the fault lies with the blind person.

  Just my $0.02

  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu


Vidyasankar Sundaresan <svidyasankar at hotmail.com> wrote:

>own swaroopa. TurIya is not a fourth state but the
>substratum of the three - which would be available to
>a man of knowledge at all times.

I wonder, who denies that the turIya is the substratum of all states? 
However, note that nowhere in the entire gauDapAda kArikAs is it explicitly 
stated that turIya is not a fourth state. The word caturtha is liberally 
used and in general use in Sanskrit, the word turIya itself means "fourth".

The statement that no one is truly removed from one's identity as brahman is 
made in the same spirit as saying that in reality there is no one bound and 
no one released, no bondage and no release. However, when one talks of 
bandha, moksha, what is the means to moksha etc., different statements are 
made.

Best regards,
Vidyasankar


---------------------------------
Finding fabulous fares is fun.
Let Yahoo! FareChase search your favorite travel sites to find flight and hotel bargains.

