+++
title = "326 Gopal"
date = "2012-06-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-June/032198.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-June/032198.html)

Namaste.

Here goes our sanathana dharma protectors talking about sastras-sampradayas
in saying who has adhikara or who is not.

I know Sri Shivashanker by email, got to know his eagerness and dedication
in learning veda mantras through skype middle of the night from Sweden
after having searching for a  so-called "ISO9000-certified" brahmanas who
knows enough to teach him.  I know of   dozens in my family - adult /
not-yet-adult males, hundreds among the so called friends/acquaintances,
thousands who call themselves brahmanas by their accent, look, stiff-lipped
ness, madi and acharas etc. only but cannot even say one of the pancha
suktas properly.

Forget about paying it later in another life and another place: we do not
say, " I do not pay tax this year, let it be taken care of in my next
life".   When it bites us in the wrong place, we care. When it goes to an
invisible karma account, we wipe our hands at the back and move on for the
next entertainment or TV soap or even to pitch-in for the never-ending
online game like "did our rishis know of gravity before they "saw" RV ninth
mandala suktas?"

Let us stop taking the scale and judging others. Even if we do not want to
take one step forward necessary for veda rakshana, before making judgements
assuming we are rishiputra-s or rishi -poutra-s,  we should get a bathroom
mirror, look at ourselves eye-to-eye and ask the question:  " what adhikara
i have (not my father, not my grandfather but just me) to pass on these
judgements?"

As we are very close to Vivekananda's mahasamadhi day and just passed swami
chinmayananda's jayanthi day, let us pause and ask this question comparing
ourselves with them:  "These are two  hindus with no adhikara to recite,
study and practice vaideeka at par with brahmanas of their times ( my
grandfathers included ;-)),  but  have I  done more than either of these
mahapurushas to the rakshana and proper stationing of sanathana dharma in
the world arena? ". If the answer is a 'no', then it is  time to seriously
learn to be ashamed of ourselves...

-gopal



On Tue, Jun 26, 2012 at 12:34 PM, ravi chandrasekhara <vadhula at yahoo.com>wrote:

> It is wonderful to hear, but per shastras he has no adhikara for Upanayna
> and sandhya-vandana. There is alternative Sandhya method for those who do
> not have adhikara.  Dvijas who default on their duties on the other hand
> will hav eto answer/pay for it later.
>
> Ravi Chandrasekhara
>
>
>

