+++
title = "184 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2006-03-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016162.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016162.html)

My name is Ger Koekkoek, I live in the Netherlands, and I am 53 years old. 
I work at a post office for 33 years now, part time, just to have enough 
money to live from, and do some social work for psychic patients, I visit 
them, or I do something with them they don't dare to do alone, like 
shopping or walking in a forest. When I was 17 years old I thought the 
world would die soon in the explosion of a atom bomb. I used drugs, but 
someone told my parents about that. They were shocked, and for them I gave 
up the only joy I had. It was spring, and I was walking outside. The last 
experience I had was "the sun has a mirror in my head, in my head is a sun 
too". Then I realised, beyond that, something that was NO experience, for 
it was my own identity: What I am is not a body, not something between 
birth and dead, I am timeless and without source, and it's perfect. 
Perhaps this was a bit too much for a European young boy, but after a long 
time I came a bit to a realistic view on what I am and what I am not in a 
personal way. I became interested in western medieval mysticism, in 
Boeddhism, and in Jnana Yoga and adwaita vedanta. But in Europe I only met 
people that changed the vedanta filosophy in a popular way. Shortly this 
popular way sais the following: for everything is god, your live wil be 
succesful if you listen to god. This is contradicting itself: if 
everything is god, and you really see that, then succes is no longer 
necessairy, and only that is salvation. But the last is very seldom in an 
enduring way. I saw a glimpse of it, no more, and therefore I am still 
seeking and thinking, listening, and turning my attention inward to it's 
own source as long as I can without too much restraint. And therefore I'am 
interested in what you are talking about on your site. Hoping you give me 
an entrance, with greetings, Ger

