+++
title = "260 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040885.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040885.html)

Aurobindji.

I do not find anything that I have to reply. I did not advocate that one
should say that there is no day and night or many other things you have
mentioned..

regards,
Sarma.

On Wed, Apr 13, 2016 at 6:37 AM, Aurobind Padiyath <
aurobind.padiyath at gmail.com> wrote:

> Pranams,
> Your statement:
>  "Developing an opposing mental attitude to science will be detrimental to
> the person who cultivates such an an attitude.
> It does not effect science. You cannot fight science because you do not
> want to give up your pet beliefs."
> Should be in tune with the practical aspects too.
> Just because science has given rise to the fact that the Sun never sets
> doesn't mean that there is no day and night. And because of the very same
> reason we experience tri-sandhya, and that makes a traditionally oriented
> person to under take sandhyavandanams. One cannot say that is wrong because
> science does not agree and has proved that there is no Sun set.
> So too many of the Acharams are based on the experience like the fixation
> of dik viz East West etc in a globe why do you fix East etc?
> So there is this dichotomy of science and practice of traditional
> Acharams.
> Where the tradition can accommodate the knowledge of science for
> "improving" it let it absorb into it, like using of the modern watches than
> looking at Sun to determine the time, etc. Where it do not find a need let
> traditional Acharams continue until scientific evidence is final, not at
> any intermediate level.
>
> Aurobind
>
>
> On Tue, 12 Apr 2016 22:49 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ, <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
>> Dear Anandji and Chandramouliji,
>>
>> Muhurtas are determined on the basis of nakshatra, rasi, thidhi  etc.
>> These
>> depend on observations. The hypocracy of old siddhantis
>> can easily be seen when they use correct values when calculating eclipses
>> so that pubic may not loose faith in them but use their old methods in
>> other things.
>>
>> Science is the same for every body. There is no Hindu science, Christian
>> science etc.
>> Science is derived from the observation of natural phenomena, analysing
>> the
>> phenomena and discovering the laws governing the phenomena.
>> This is the same for all the people whether one likes it or not.
>>
>> Developing an opposing mental attitude to science will be detrimental to
>> the person who cultivates such an an attitude.
>> It does not effect science. You cannot fight science because you do not
>> want to give up your pet beliefs.
>>
>> regards,
>> Sarma.
>>
>> regards,
>> Sarma.
>>
>> On Tue, Apr 12, 2016 at 10:40 PM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <
>> dvnsarma at gmail.com> wrote:
>>
>> > Dear Anandji and Chandramouliji,
>> >
>> > Muhurtas are determined on the basis of nakshatra, rasi, thidhi  etc.
>> > These depend on observations. The hypocracy of old siddhantis
>> > can easily be seen when they use correct values when calculating
>> eclipses
>> > so that pubic may not loose faith in them but use their old methods in
>> > other things.
>> >
>> > Science is the same for every body. There is no Hindu science, Christian
>> > science etc.
>> > Science is derived from the observation of natural phenomena, analysing
>> > the phenomena and discovering the laws governing the phenomena.
>> > This is the same for all the people whether one likes it or not.
>> >
>> > Developing an opposing mental attitude to science will be detrimental to
>> > the person who cultivates such an an attitude.
>> > It does not effect science. You cannot fight science because you do not
>> > want to give up your pet beliefs.
>> >
>> > regards,
>> > Sarma.
>> >
>> > On Tue, Apr 12, 2016 at 9:24 PM, Anand Hudli <anandhudli at hotmail.com>
>> > wrote:
>> >
>> >> There are two sides to this debate, which has been going on for quite
>> >> some time. One side, as you indicate, argues that panchanga elements,
>> such
>> >> as vAra, tithi, Nakshatra, yoga, and karaNa (these five elements make
>> the
>> >> basic panchanga), must be as accurate as possible in agreeing with
>> >> observations. Since modern astronomy provides a higher degree of
>> accuracy,
>> >> we must rely on modern methods to derive the panchanga elements so as
>> to
>> >> achieve close agreement with observations.
>> >>
>> >> The other side may now ask: what is the purpose of using a panchanga?
>> Is
>> >> it to ensure that it agrees with observations as closely as possible?
>> >> Certainly not, since the average traditional person is not interested
>> in
>> >> knowing the exact position of heavenly bodies on any given day.
>> Rather, the
>> >> average traditional person is interested in following traditions as
>> closely
>> >> as possible to his/ her ancestors' ways of doing so. This is a much
>> broader
>> >> perspective than astronomical calculations, which is just one aspect of
>> >> following one's ancestors' customs as closely as possible. For
>> example, one
>> >> may avoid cooking food on electric or gas stoves or in microwave ovens
>> and
>> >> choose to cook on an old fashioned coal based stove. Even today there
>> are
>> >> people who do not use modern cooking methods and appliances. Do we
>> ridicule
>> >> them for doing so? Following tradition as closely as possible in the
>> >> footsteps of our ancestors should be the overall goal, even if it means
>> >> avoiding modern methods where they conflict with tradition. It is in
>> this
>> >> spirit that traditional methods such as the Surya Siddhanta still find
>> a
>> >> place in our Panchangas.
>> >>
>> >> Thus the debate goes on.
>> >>
>> >> Anand
>> >> ------------------------------
>> >> *From:* D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <dvnsarma at gmail.com>
>> >> *Sent:* Tuesday, April 12, 2016 6:34:37 AM
>> >> *To:* Anand Hudli; A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
>> >> *Subject:* Re: [Advaita-l] Sringeri Panchanga
>> >>
>> >> Astronamy is the science observable objects like Sun, Moon, stars and
>> >> planets. Any Almanac that does not agree with observation is
>> meaningless
>> >> and psuedoscience.
>> >>
>> >> regards,
>> >> Sarma.
>> >>
>> >> On Tue, Apr 12, 2016 at 10:44 AM, Anand Hudli via Advaita-l <
>> >> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>> >>
>> >>> >Is this Driksiddha Panchanga?
>> >>>
>> >>> This appears to be based on the Surya SiddhAnta.
>> >>>
>> >>> Anand
>> >>> _______________________________________________
>> >>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> >>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>> >>>
>> >>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> >>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>> >>>
>> >>> For assistance, contact:
>> >>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>> >>>
>> >>
>> >>
>> >
>> _______________________________________________
>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>
>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>
>> For assistance, contact:
>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>
> --
>
> Aurobind Padiyath
> +91-9689755499
>
