+++
title = "268 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-04-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040928.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040928.html)

Sri Sundaram Venkataramanji,

You appear to be of the opinion that since the the star which should be at
Aries 0 for nirayana has vanished that nirayana division is arbitrary.
Be it so. What prevents us from adopting scientific calculations which give
us accurate observable positions in sayana  or one of the nirayana
rasi chakras. Once we adopt one of the nirayana chakras as standard it is
only scientifically accurate calculations that give the position of a
heavenly body with respect to that chakra. Existence of multiple choices
for nirayana Zodiac does not invalidate Astronomical Science.

regards,
Sarma.

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 7:34 PM, Sundaram Venkatraman <svenkat52 at gmail.com>
wrote:

> Dear Sarmaji,
>
> It is in the conversion of Sayana to Nirayana that there emerges a chink
> in your scientific observation argument. The star that pointed to Mesha 0
> degrees, it seems, has vanished. So most ayanamsas are derived on the basis
> of an arbitrarily decided date on which sages like Parashara or Varamihira
> are supposed to have written their astrology classics. On that date it is
> assumed that the Sayana and Nirayana zodiacs were in total alignment. It is
> scientifically determined that every year Mesha 0 deg of Sayana zodiac
> precedes by 50 secs. So from that arbitrarily decided date, total degree of
> precession of equinoxes till the current year (Durmukhi for us) or ayanamsa
> is calculated and the same is deducted from the Sayana degrees of various
> planets to arrive at their Nirayana degrees. And there are more ayanamsas
> than can be counted on the fingers of both hands. The most popular among
> the ayanamsas is the Lahiri ayanamsa which is adopted by the calendar
> reforms committee of Govt of India. So as you can see there is absolutely
> nothing that is very scientific about the determination of Nirayana zodiac.
> All the science that is involved in the determination of the Sayana zodiac
> which is based on actual observations is lost in the translation to the
> Nirayana zodiac. Since the drikganita Panchangs are based on Nirayana
> zodiac they are as reliable as the ayanamsa on which they are based. Kanchi
> mutt's panchang is based on Lahiri ayanamsa.
>
> Regards,
> Venkat
>
> Sent from my iPhone
>
> > On 14-Apr-2016, at 5:27 PM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ via Advaita-l <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> >
> > Jaldharji,
> >
> >> Do you think there are 28 days in February and 31 days in August because
> > of "Science"?
> >
> > Yes, sir. Whether it is adhikamasa or kshayamasa or 28 or 29 days in
> > February are done for purpose of adjusting our calender  to the accurate
> > length of the year which Astronomical science determines  with
> > progressively increasing accuracy.
> >
> >> But a tithi or rashi is cultural.
> >
> > Tithi is the visible fraction of the orb of the moon. This can be
> > calculated only with careful deduction of the motions of the moon and
> earth
> > from observation.
> >
> > There are two types of Rasis in vogue. Sayana and Nirayana. Sayana Rasis
> > are counted from vernal equinox as the start of Mesha rasi deviding
> Zodiac
> > into 12 equal parts. This needs observation.
> >
> > Nirayana rasis used by astrologers are supposed to start with star group
> > called Ashwani. I do not know  whether they take the first of the two
> > bright stars as the first point of mesha or the the first point of the
> > castellation Mesha (consisting of multiple stars) as the first point.
> > Either way observation is needed.
> >
> >
> >
> > regards,
> > Sarma.
> >
> > On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 4:21 PM, Jaldhar H. Vyas via Advaita-l <
> > advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> >
> >> On Thu, 14 Apr 2016, H S Chandramouli wrote:
> >>
> >> Please clarify. By drksiddha are you referring to DrikGanitha or
> >>> something else ??
> >>
> >> Yes. Drksiddha or khagolasiddha refers to the method of ganita used.
> >>
> >> --
> >> Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
> >> _______________________________________________
> >> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> >> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >>
> >> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> >> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >>
> >> For assistance, contact:
> >> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> > _______________________________________________
> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >
> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >
> > For assistance, contact:
> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
