+++
title = "272 Anand Hudli"
date = "2016-04-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040896.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040896.html)

>I would like to point out that Kanchi Mutt uses Driksiddha Panchanga and
>Sringeri uses old method panchanga.

>How do the traditionalists swallow this dichotomy.

Science and scientific methods are agnostic to the impact on Dharma.
Surely, a Panchanga is not merely an astronomical manual of planetary
positions, but more importantly an aid to a person following Dharma.
Whether or not a more accurate picture of positions of celestial bodies is
necessary for following Dharma is ultimately to be decided by the leaders
of religious institutions. The decision cannot be made by bystanders like
us nor by scientists, simply because we have no deep understanding of
Dharma, and should not be second guessing the maThAdhipatis and other
stalwart upholders of Dharma. A purely scientific approach may not be
suitable. For example, scientists hold that there is no reason why we
should not be having lunch or dinner during eclipses. However, even the
Mathas that support modern astronomical methods for panchanga construction
and prediction of eclipses of the sun and moon will necessarily prescribe
that we should not eat during the Vedha kAla, which includes the duration
of the eclipse.

It is important to understand that where there is a doubt in matters
relating to Dharma the words of the taittiriya upanishad serve as a guide,
in addition to the tradition followed by one's own family, community, the
region of residence, etc.:

अथ यदि ते कर्मविचिकित्सा वा वृत्तविचिकित्सा वा स्यात् ।  ये तत्र ब्राह्मणाः
संमर्शिनः । युक्ता आयुक्ताः । अलूक्षा धर्मकामाः स्युः । यथा ते तत्र
वर्तेरन् । तथा तत्र वर्तेथाः ॥ ९ ॥

Anand
