+++
title = "33 N.Seshan"
date = "2003-09-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-September/012165.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-September/012165.html)

1) I think the hacker - Mayeda criterion has been discussed in a compact
fashion in K.C Pande's book on Shankara ( I think it is a Motilal
Banarsidass publication). Also this did come up as a matter for discussion
in a book in Malayalam by V. Panoli which was publshed by the "Mathrubhumi
Publishing House". My opinion is the former is much more worthwhile. I have
also read that the Vivekachudamani was given a standing of authenticity only
bcos of Ramana 's acceptance. Thanks for the other names  who are in this
field of research. I thought the brihadaranyaka Bhashya too was accepted as
authentic.

  > On the other hand, other scholars doubt the attribution of
vivekacUDAmaNi
> and the yogasUtra bhAshya vivaraNa to Sankara, the former because it seems
> to be post-Sankaran in many respects and the latter because Sankara's
> connection to the yoga tradition independent of the vedAnta tradition is
> held to be questionable. This vivaraNa has also not been studied much
within
> the advaita tradition, which points to its probably having been written by
a
> different author. The oldest available manuscripts of the yogasUtra
bhAshya
> vivaraNa are in Malayalam script. It is said that there was another
Sankara
> bhagavatpAda from a Kerala nambUdiri family in the 14th century or so, who
> may have been the author of this text.

2) Can you give me the source of the above mentioned malayalam work or what
publisher has brought out the same?
3) Is there any known opinion from the traditional mathas such as Sringeri
on the matter of authorship? Or kanchi for that matter?

 Rgds/Seshan

