+++
title = "142 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-09-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025541.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025541.html)

OM shrii gurubhyo namaH

Namaste,

We continue with the series.

49. nanu niravayavasya paramaatmanaH kutaH avayavaH ekadeshaH aMshaH
iti\?  saavayavatve cha vinaashaprasa~NgaH avayavavibhaagaat.h |
naishha doshhaH\, avidyaakR^itopaadhiparichchhinnaH ekadeshaH aMshaH
eva kalpito yataH || 15.7 ||

##Objection: How can the partless supreme Self have any limb, fragment
or part? If it has limbs, then there arises the contingency of Its
becoming destroyed through the dismemberment of the limbs?

Reply: This fault does not arise, since Its fragment, which is
delimited by an adjunct arising out of ignorance, is imagined to be a
part, as it were.
##




50. aadityaadishhu hi sattvaM atyantaprakaasham.h
atyantabhaasvaram.h\; ataH tatraiva aavistaraM jyotiH iti tat.h
vishishhyate\, na tu tatraiva tat.h adhikamiti | yathaa hi shloke
tulye.api mukhasaMsthaane na kaashhThakuDyaadau mukham.h
aavirbhavati\, aadarshaadau tu svachchhe svachchhatare cha
taaratamyena aavirbhavati\; tadvat.h || 15.12 ||


##Since in the sun etc. the sattva is very much in evidence, is
greatly brilliant, therefore there is an abundance of the light (of
Consciousness) in them alone. And so it (sun etc.) is specially
mentioned. But it is not that it (Consciousness) is abundant only
there there. Indeed, as in the world, a face, though in the same
position, is not reflected in wood, a wall etc., but in a mirror etc.
it is reflected according to the degree in which there are more and
more transparent, so is it here.##


(To be continued.)
bhava sha~nkara deshika me sharaNaM
Ramakrishna

