+++
title = "50 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-09-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025410.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025410.html)

OM shrii sha~nkaraachaaryavaryaaya namaH
OM shrii gurubhyo namaH

namaste,

We continue with the series.


42. yathaashaastraM xetraxetraj~nalaxaNabhedaparij~naanapuurvakaM
praak.h darshitaruupaat.h xetraat.h mu~njaadiva ishhiikaaM
yathoktalaxaNaM xetraj~naM pravibhajya ##'## na sattannaasaduchyate
##'## ityanena nirastasarvopaadhivisheshhaM j~neyaM brahmasvaruupeNa
yaH pashyati\, xetraM cha maayaanirmitahasti\-
svapradR^ishhTavastugandharvanagaraadivat.h ##'## asadeva sadiva
avabhaasate ##'## iti evaM nishchitavij~naanaH yaH tasya
yathoktasamyagdarshanavirodhaat.h apagachchhati mithyaaj~naanam.h
||13.26||


##After having known the distintion between and the characteristics of
the field and the Knower of the field according to the scriptures, and
having separated, like a stalk from Munjaa-grass, the above-described
Knower of the field from the field whose characteristics have been
shown earlier, he who realizes the Knowable (i.e., the Knower of the
field) -- which, in accordance with 'That is neither called being nor
non-being' (12), is devoid of all distinctions created by adjuncts
created by adjuncts, -- as identical with Brahman; and he who has the
firm realization that the field is surely unreal like an elephat
created by magic, a thing seen in a dream, an imaginary city seen in
the sky, etc. and it appears., and it appears as though real -- for
him false knowledge becomes eradicated, since it is opposed to the
right knowledge described above.##


43. etasmin.h paramaarthasaaMkhyadarshane sthitaanaaM
j~naananishhThaanaaM paramahaMsaparivraajakaanaaM
tiraskR^itaavidyaavyavahaaraaNaaM karmaadhikaaro naasti iti tatra
tatra darshitaM bhagavataa || 13.31 ||


##It has been accordingly shown by the Lord in various places that
there is no duty to be performed by those who adhere to this
philosophy of discriminating knowledge of the supreme Reality, who are
steadfast in Knowledge, who have spurned actions arising out of
ignorance, and who are mendicants belonging to the highest Order of
monks.##



(To be continued.)

namaami bahagavadpaada sha~nkaraM loka sha~nkaraM
Ramakrishna

