+++
title = "177 Ravisankar Mayavaram"
date = "2006-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-July/017066.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-July/017066.html)

namaste

Lectures of Sri Dr. Goda Venkata Sastigal is now available MP3 format. Sri
Sastrigal is a great exponent of SrividyopAsana and vedAnta, which he
learned under the guidance of Injikkollai Brahmasri Jagadeeswara Sastrigal.
Having undergone kramantha (svashAkha) Rg veda adhyayana, Sri Sastrigal has
completed veda bhashya of Rg Veda as well as yajur veda. In addition he has
undertaken studies of sAhitya, nyAya, as well as pUrva Mimamsa. Sri
Sastrigal has also undertaken extensive studies in Uttara Mimamsa and  he
has obtained a doctorate degree in Advaita Vedanta Sastra from Rashtriya
Samskrit Samsthan, New Delhi. Sri Sastrigal has been  conferred  Advaita
Siddhi Ratnakara  title by Sudharma Rakshana Parishad,Tenali under the aegis
of Sringeri Sankara Mutt. He has been recognized for his service by both
Sringeri and Kanchi matha-s.

You will find more information about Sri Sastrigal and the available
lectures at
http://www.ambaa.org/audio/GVS_Lectures/

Information for the above page and the CDs were provided by Sri K.
Sundararaman (who is a member of our list).  He gave me a sample from
parasurama kalpa sUtra lectures to me first and I was simply amazed at the
depth of Sri Sastrigal's scholarship  listening to these lectures (they are
not available for distribution yet).  Sri Sastrigal's lectures of Sri lalitA
sahasranAma was one of the sources and inspiration for the huge 1000 page
tamil translation of bhAskararAya bhAsya brought out Jnana Bhaskara Sangam
(see http://groups.yahoo.com/group/ambaa-l/message/6227, The Hindu also
wrote a detailed review of this book  but I do not have the link).


Ravi
<abhayambika at gmail.com>

