+++
title = "33 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2003-12-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-December/012446.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-December/012446.html)

The following book (sanskrit translation) suggested by  Sri Ballakrishnen
Subramaniam  is available in University of Texas Library.  If you are in the
US you should be able to get it via Inter-Library Loan. The same library has
the book by Lala Sreeram also.

In the process of searching, I also found another book by the same author
called vrttiprabhakara and it contains 8 chapter. Again it is a digest of
advaita-vedAnta. The reference in the catalog notes very highly about this
book.

"Mumukshujanonke hitartha, anekaneka udaharanondvara vrttiyonkarike Vedanta
sastraka siddhanta pratipadana kiya hai." Summary: Digest of the Advaita
philosophy.


You can search UTNETCAT, which is treasure house of many good Indian books,
at
http://utdirect.utexas.edu/lib/utnetcat/.



The record details of the Sanskrit Translation:

AUTHOR:
Niscaladasa, d. 1863
TITLE:
Vicarasagarah.
EDITION:
(1st ed.)
PUBLISHED:
1964.
DESCRIPTION:
viii, xcvi, 376 p. ports. ; 26 cm.
NOTES:
Added t. p. : Vichara sagaram.
In Sanskrit ; pref. in English.
SUBJECTS:
Advaita
OTHER AUTHORS:
Vasudeva Brahmendra Saraswathi, Swami.
Panchapagesa Sastri, P., d. 1963.
Kalyanasundarasastri
OTHER TITLES:
Vichara sagaram.
OCLC NUMBER:
20123945
Locations:
B 132 A3 N52 PCL Stacks


Ravi

--- In ambaa-l at yahoogroups.com, "ballakrishnen subramaniam"
<ballakrishnen at h...> wrote:
Dear Prof V.Krishnamurthy,

The book "Vichara SAgaram" was translated from hindi to sanskrit  by
HH
Vasudeva Brahmendra Saraswati of Ganapati Agraharam in Tanjore Dist.
HH
attained samadhi in the year 1927 at Ganapati agraharam. He
established a
mutt at Mayavaram in Tanjore dist. This book along with another book
by him
called Brahma Anhikam is available at the mutt. It was even published
by
B.G.Paul and co, Madras in the late 50's. But the company is non
existant
today. Copies are with old scholars in Tamil Nadu, but they will be
unwilling to part with it. The contents of the book is in a nutshell
the
"Prastana Triya Bhasya of Shankara.
Ballakrishnen

>From: "V. Krishnamurthy" <profvk at y...>
>

