+++
title = "86 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2013-08-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-August/035236.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-August/035236.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Long time back one of my friends had sent the below discourse by Sri Swamy 
Ramateertha.  I saved it in my file section because of its beauty and 
eloquency.  BruhadAraNyaka maNtra is beautifully explained here with our 
day to day experience.  Hope worth reading to find the happiness within !!

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



Happiness Within
Lecture delivered on December 17, 1902, in the 
Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, U.S.A.
My own Self in the form of ladies and gentlemen,
Rama does not blame European or Christian nations for their cohorts and 
armies to conquer other nations; that is also a stage in the spiritual 
development of a nation, which is at one time necessary. India had to pass 
through that stage; but India being a very old nation had weighed the 
riches of the world in the balance and found them wanting; and the same 
will be the experience of these nations that are in these days for 
accumulating worldly prosperity and riches. Why are all these nations 
trying to march cohorts to conquer other nations? What do they seek in all 
that? The only thing sought is happiness, joy, pleasure. It is true that 
some people say they do not seek happiness but knowledge. Others say that 
they seek not happiness; they seek action. That is all very good; but 
examine the hearts and minds of average men, or of ordinary mortals. You 
will find that the ultimate goal which they all set before them, the 
ultimate goal they all seek directly or indirectly, consciously or 
unconsciously, is happiness, nothing but happiness.
Let us examine this evening where happiness resides, whether happiness 
lives in the palace or the cottage, whether happiness dwells in the charms 
of women or in things that gold and silver can buy. Where is the native 
home of happiness? Happiness has also a history of its own. These are 
great travelling days; steam and electricity have annihilated time and 
space, great travelling days these are, and everybody writes an account of 
his travels. Happiness also travels. Let us have something of the travels 
of happiness.
We start with the first glimpse of happiness that a child has in his 
infancy. All the happiness in this world is for the child located in the 
skirt of the mother, or in the bosom of the dear mother. All the happiness 
is located there. This is the first stage on the main road which happiness 
has to travel along, the mother’s skirt, the mother’s bosom, say. To the 
infant there is nothing in this world which brings happiness so much as 
the mother’s bosom. The child hides his face behind the skirts of the 
mother and there he says, "Look! Look! Find me out! Where am I?" and he 
laughs heartily. He laughs with all his heart and soul. Books are 
meaningless to the child; treasures are useless to him. Fruits and sweets 
have no taste for the child that has not yet been weaned. The whole world 
of pleasure is, for the child, concentrated there.
A year passes and the happiness of the child changes its centre; it moves 
on to some thing else. The residence of happiness now becomes the toys, 
the beautiful toys, pollies and dollies. In the second state, the child 
does not like the mother so much as he likes his own toys. Sometimes the 
child quarrels with the dear, dear mother, for the sake of toys, for the 
sake of dollies.
A few months or years more and no more is his happiness in the pollies and 
dollies; it has shifted its centre again, it is no longer located in these 
things. In the third stage, when the child grows up to be a boy, happiness 
is located for him in books, especially in story books. This is the case 
with an ordinary intelligent child; sometimes happiness is in other 
things, but we are taking an ordinary case. Now the story books engross 
all the love and affection of the boy. Now the toys, dollies and pollies 
lose their charms; story books take their place, and he finds them 
beautiful and attractive. But happiness travels on.
The schoolboy enters the college, and in college life, his happiness is 
found in something else, say, in scientific books or philosophical works 
or the like. He reads them for sometime, but his happiness has travelled 
from books to the longing of seeking honours in the university; his desire 
is to reach the residence of his happiness, the headquarters of his joy. 
The student comes out of the university with flying colours. He gets a 
lucrative post and the happiness of this young man is centred in money, in 
riches. Now the one dream of his life is to accumulate riches, to be rich. 
He wants to become a big man, to amass a large fortune. When he gets some 
wealth after working in the office for a few years, his happiness passes 
on into something else. What is that? Need that be told? It is woman.
Now the young man wants to have a wife, and for the sake of a wife, he is 
ready to spend away his riches. The mother’s skirt no longer gives him any 
happiness; the toys have no charm for him; the story-books are cast aside, 
and they are read only on those occasions when they are expected to give 
him some insight into the nature of that dream of his life—the woman. He 
is all a sacrifice for the sake of his wife. Hard-earned riches are cast 
to the winds for the sake of petty whims of what is now the headquarters 
of his happiness. The young man lives for sometime with the woman, and lo! 
the happiness is sighted a little yonder. The pleasure he could derive 
from the thought of his wife in the beginning, he no longer gets now. 
Taking the case of an ordinary youth, an ordinary youth of India, the 
happiness of the youth now passes from the woman on to the coming child. 
Now a child becomes the dream of his life. He wants to have a child, an 
angel, a seraph, a cherub in his house. Rama knows not much of the state 
of affairs in this country; but in India, after marrying, people pray to 
God and yearn for a child. They do all that lies in their powers to seek 
the aid of doctors and to invoke the blessings of holy men; all that they 
can do they do in order to be blessed with a child.
In the expectation of the child, concentrates all the happiness of the 
youth. The child is the sixth stage in his travel of happiness, in the 
march of joy. The youth is then blessed with a child. His joy knows no 
bounds; he is full of spirits, he springs up to his feet; he is elated; he 
is, as it were, raised above the earth many feet; he does not walk, he 
swims in the air, so to speak. His soul is full of happiness when he gets 
a child. In the sixth stage, in the moon-faced child, the happiness of the 
grown-up youth has reached in a way its acme. The intensest happiness is 
when he sees the face of his child. The happiness of an ordinary man has 
reached its zenith. After that, the youth begins to decline in spirits, 
the child becomes a grown-up boy and the charm is lost. The happiness of 
this man will go on travelling from object to object, sometimes located in 
this thing, at other times residing in that thing. But the intensity of 
happiness in the objects with an ordinary man will be not so strong, as it 
is in the love of his own child.
Let us now examine whether happiness really dwells in objects like 
these—the mother’s skirt, dollies and pollies, books, riches, woman, 
child, or any object and anything of this world at all. Before proceeding 
further, let us liken the travelling happiness to the travelling 
Sun-light. Sunshine also travels from place to place. It is at one time 
shining over India, and at another time on Europe. It travels on. When 
shades of the evening fall, see how rapidly the Sunshine shifts away from 
place to place. It shines on eastern America and it travels on to its 
west. See how the Sunlight goes skipping on tiptoe, slipping on from land 
to land, and is then seen spreading its lustre on Japan and so on. The 
Sunshine travels on from place to place. But all these different places 
where the Sunshine is seen are not the source, the home of Sunshine. The 
home of Sunshine must be somewhere else; the home of Sunshine is the Sun. 
Similarly let us examine happiness which goes on travelling from object to 
object like the Sunshine. Whence does it proceed? Where is its real home? 
Let us look at the Sun of happiness, as it were.
Take the case of the gentleman who has been blessed with a child. This 
gentleman is sitting in his office. He is busy with his official duties, 
and all of a sudden he hears the ding-ding of the bell. What bell? The 
telephone, but when he is about to hear what the message may be, his heart 
beats. They say, coming calamities cast their shadows before. His heart 
beats, never was it so with him before. He reaches up to the telephone and 
hears a message. Oh, what a distressing message it must have been! The 
gentleman was panting and sobbing; he lost all presence of mind; his 
cheeks lost all colour; with a pallid, cadaverous face he came rapidly to 
his seat, put on his coat and hat and went out of the office as if he were 
shot like a bullet from a gun. He did not even ask the consent of the 
chief officer, the head of the department. He did not even exchange a word 
with the employees in the room. He did not even lock up the papers that 
were lying on the desk, he lost all presence of mind and went straight out 
of the office. All his fellow officials were astounded. He reached the 
streets and saw a car running before him, he ran up to the car and there 
he met a postman who gave him a letter. This letter brought to him the 
happy news, (if in the circumstances it can be called happy news from the 
worldly point of view) the happy news of a large fortune having fallen to 
his lot. The man had bought a share in a lottery, and about $10,000 had 
fallen to his lot. This news ought to have cheered him up, ought to have 
filled him with joy, but it didn’t, it didn’t. The message he had received 
over the telephone was weighing heavily on his heart. This news brought 
him no pleasure. He found in the same car one of the greatest officials in 
the State, sitting just in front of him. This was an official to have an 
interview with whom had been the one dream of his life. But look here. 
This gentleman did not exchange glances with the official; he turned his 
head away. He also noticed the sweet face of lady friend. It had been the 
ambition of this gentleman’s life to meet her and exchange words with her, 
but now he was insensible to her sunny smiles. Well, Rama ought not to 
keep him in a state of suspense so long, nor should you be kept in a state 
of suspense any longer.
He reached the street where his house was located and a great noise and 
tumult was there, and he saw clouds of smoke rising to the sky and veiling 
the Sun. He saw tongues of fire going up to the heavens; he saw his wife, 
grandmother, mother and other relatives weeping and bewailing the 
conflagration which was consuming their house. He saw all his relations 
there but missed one thing; he missed the dear little baby, he missed the 
sweet little child. That was not there. He asked about the child, and the 
wife could make no answer. She simply answered by sobbing and crying; she 
could make no articulate answer. He found out the truth. He came to know 
that the child had been left in the house. The child was with the nurse at 
the time when the fire broke. The nurse had placed the child in the 
cradle, the child was asleep and the nurse had left the room. Now the 
inmates of the house being panic-stricken at the sight of the fire 
consuming the house, had quitted the house in haste, each thinking that 
the child must be with some other inmate of the house. All of them came 
out, and now they found that the child was left in the room which was then 
being enveloped by fire. There was crying and gnashing of teeth, cutting 
of lips, beating of breasts, but no help. Here, this gentleman, his wife, 
his mother and friends and the nurse were crying aloud to the people, to 
the standers-by, to the policemen, and asking them to save their child, to 
rescue their dear, little baby. "Save our little dear child anyway you 
can. We will give away all our property, we shall give away all the wealth 
that we may accumulate within ten years from today, we will give up all; 
save our child, save our child."
They are willing to give up everything for the sake of the child. Indeed, 
the child is a sweet thing, the dear little baby is a very sweet thing, 
and it is worthwhile to sacrifice all our property, all our wealth and all 
our interest for the sake of the child. But Rama asks one thing, "Is the 
child the source of happiness, the sweetest thing in the world, or is the 
source of happiness somewhere else?" Mark here. Everything is being 
sacrificed for the child, but is not the child itself being sacrificed for 
something higher, or for something else? Wealth is given away, riches are 
given away, property is given away for the child, but the child is being 
given away for something else. Even the lives of those people who may 
venture to jump into the fire may be lost. But even that dear little child 
is being sacrificed for something else, for something higher, and that 
something else must of necessity be sweeter than the child, that something 
else must be the real centre of happiness, must be real source of 
happiness, and what is that something? Just see. They did not jump into 
the fire themselves. That something is the Self. If they jump into the 
fire themselves, they sacrifice themselves and that they are not prepared 
to do. On the child is everything else sacrificed, and on that Self is the 
child sacrificed.
We see now the highest stage of happiness, the child has not happiness in 
itself. The child is beautiful, lovely and the source of happiness, 
because the child is blessed with the Sunshine which proceeds from the 
Self; that Sunshine was not inherent in the child itself. If that Sunshine 
of happiness had been inherent in the child, it would have lasted in the 
person of the child for ever. Notice that the Sunshine which brightened 
the face of the child proceeded from the source within. The source was 
within the Self.
Here we come a little nearer to the source of happiness, to the home of 
happiness. Not for the sake of the child is the child dear, the child is 
dear for the sake of the Self. Not for the sake of the wife is wife dear; 
not for the sake of the husband is husband dear; the wife is dear for the 
sake of the Self; the husband is dear for the sake of the Self. This is 
the truth. People say they love a thing for its own sake. But this cannot 
be; this cannot be. Nor for the sake of the wealth is wealth dear, wealth 
is dear for the sake of the Self. When the wife who was dear at one time, 
does not serve the interests of the husband, she is divorced; when the 
husband who was dear at one time, does not serve the interests of the 
wife, he is divorced. When wealth does not serve the purpose, it is given 
up. You know the case of Nero. He did not see that the beautiful Rome, 
that metropolis of his, was of much interest to him, was of much use to 
him. To him it was of greater interest to see a conflagration; to him it 
was of more interest to see a big bonfire. Look here. He went up to the 
top of an adjoining hill and asked his friends to go and set the whole 
city on fire in order that he might enjoy the sight of a grand 
conflagration. Here was he fiddling while Rome was burning. Thus we see 
that even wealth is divorced, given up, when it does not serve our 
interests.
Rama was an eyewitness of a very strange phenomenon, a very curious 
phenomenon. There was a great flood, a great inundation of the river 
Ganga, and the river went on rising. On the branches of a tree were 
sitting several monkeys; there was a female-monkey and some children of 
this female-monkey. All these children came up to the female monkey. The 
water rose up to the place where the female monkey was seated. Then the 
she-monkey jumped up to a higher branch; the water came up to that place. 
The female monkey come to the highest top-branch, and the water rose up 
even to that place. All the children were clinging to the body of this 
female-monkey. The water reached her feet; then she just took hold of one 
child, one baby-monkey, and placed it underneath her feet. The water rose 
still higher, and then this female-monkey took hold of another child and 
placed it under her feet. The water still rose; and the third child was 
also taken up and mercilessly placed under her feet to save herself. Just 
so it is. People and things are dear to us as long as they serve our 
interests, our purposes. The very moment that our interests are at stake, 
we sacrifice everything.
Thus we come to the conclusion that the seat of happiness, the source of 
happiness is somewhere within the Self. The home of happiness is somewhere 
in the Self, but where is it? Is it in the feet? The feet support the 
whole body, it may be in the feet, but no, it is not in the feet. Had it 
been in the feet, the feet ought to have been the dearest thing in the 
world. Of course, the feet are dearer than anything else outside, but they 
are not so dear as the hands are. Is the home of happiness in the hands? 
The hands are dearer than the feet, but they are not the home of 
happiness. Then, is happiness located in the nose or in the eye? The eyes 
are dearer than the hands or the nose, but happiness is not located in 
them. Think of something that is dearer even than the eyes. You might say 
it is the life. Rama says take the whole body first. The whole body is not 
the home of happiness. We see that this whole body we are changing every 
moment. In several years, every particle of the body is replaced by a new 
particle. It may be in the intellect, in the brain, in the mind. It may be 
there. But let us see if there is not something even dearer than the 
intellect. Let us examine that. If there be something which is dearer and 
sweeter even than the intellect, then, that may be the home of happiness. 
We say that life, or as the Hindus put it, prana may be the source of 
happiness, because oftentimes people want to live even at the sacrifice of 
their reasoning powers. Here is a choice between two alternatives, die 
altogether, or live as a crazy, lunatic man. Everybody will choose the 
alternative of life, even in a crazy, lunatic frame. Thus we see that 
intellect or intelligence is sacrificed at the altar of life. Then life, 
personal life, this may be the home of happiness, the Sun from which all 
happiness emanates. Just examine whether life is really the home of 
happiness or not. Vedanta says, No! No! Even life is not the home of 
happiness, the Heaven within is higher up still; even beyond individual, 
personal life. Where is it then?
Rama once saw a young man at the point of death. He was suffering from a 
very bad disease. There was excruciating pain in his body. The pain began 
in the toes of the feet. At first it was not so great, but after a while 
it kept coming up, and then his body was undergoing a hysterical movement. 
Gradually, the pain came up to the knees, and then rose higher, until that 
dreadful pain reached the stomach, and when the pain reached the heart, 
the man died. The last words this young man uttered were these, "Oh, when 
shall this life leave me, when shall these pranas leave me!" These were 
the words of that young man. You know, in this country you say he gave up 
the ghost. In India we say he gave up the body. This shows the difference. 
Here the body is looked upon as the Self and the ghost is looked upon as 
something tacked on. In India the body is looked upon as something foreign 
to the spirit; the real Self is looked upon as the reality. There, when 
the body dies, nobody believes that he dies; the body changes, he does not 
perish. And so, the words that escaped the lips of that youth were, "Of, 
when shall I give up this life; when shall this prana leave me!"
Here we have something higher even than life; some thing superior to 
"prana", something which says, "My life," something which says, "My 
prana," something which possesses the "prana" and is above the "prana" or 
life, and that something is sweeter by far than the individual, personal 
life or "prana" Here we see that the "prana" or life in that particular 
body did not serve interests of the higher Self, of the Self higher than 
"prana", and the "prana" or life was sacrificed; the "prana" or life was 
thrown off. Here we see something which is superior to the "prana" or 
life, for which the life is sacrificed. This must be, by all means, 
sweeter by far than life even and that must be the home of "anand" or 
happiness; that must be the source, the origin of our joy. Now we see, why 
"prana" or life is sweeter than intellect; because pranas are nearer to 
the real Self, the Self within. Why is it that the intellect is sweeter 
than the eyes? Because the intellect is nearer to the real Self than the 
eyes. And why is it that the eyes are dearer than the feet? Because the 
eyes partake more of the real Self in you than the feet do. Why is it that 
everybody looks upon his child as being far more beautiful than the child 
of somebody else, of his neighbour? Vedanta says, "Because this particular 
child you call ‘mine’ you have gilded a little with the gold of your real 
Self." Any book in which you may write a line of your own, any work that 
contains something contributed by your pen appears to you to be far more 
worthy than any other book, even if it came from the pen of Plato. Why is 
it? Because this book which you call ‘mine’ has the sunshine of your real 
Self in it. It is blessed with the sunshine of Heaven within. Thus the 
Hindu says that the bliss, the real metropolis of happiness is within you. 
All Heaven is within you, the source of all pleasure is within you. This 
being the case, how unreasonable it is to seek happiness elsewhere!
In India, we have this story about a lover. He pined for his beloved one; 
all his body was reduced to a veritable skeleton; all his flesh was dried 
up, so to say. The king of the country in which this young man lived 
brought him into his court one day, and he also brought the lady-love of 
the young man into his presence. The king saw that the woman was very 
ugly. The king then brought before this lover all the fair damsels that 
adorned his court, and asked this lover to choose one of the these. This 
man said, "O Shah! O King! Don’t make a fool of yourself. O King! you 
know, love makes a man very blind. O King! you have no eyes to see. Look 
at her with my eyes, and then say whether she is fair or ugly. Look at her 
with my eyes." This is the secret of all the charms in this world. That is 
all. That is the secret of all the fascination of the attractive objects 
in the world; O man! you yourself make all objects attractive by the way 
you look at them. Looking at an object with those eyes you yourself shed 
your lustre upon the object and then you fall in love with it. We read the 
story of Echo in Grecian mythology. She fell in love with her own image. 
So it is with all charms; they are simply the image of self within you, 
the Heaven within you. They are simply your shadow. Nothing else. That 
being the case, how unreasonable it is to hunt after your own shadow.
Rama knows of the case of a little child, a small baby that had just 
learnt to crawl, to walk on all fours. The child saw its shadow and 
thought it to be something strange, something remarkable. The child wanted 
to catch hold of the head of the shadow; it began to crawl to the head of 
the shadow; and the shadow also crawled. The child moved and the shadow 
also moved. The child began to cry because he could not catch the head of 
the shadow. The child falls down, the shadow is with him; the child rises 
up and begins to hunt for the shadow. In the meantime, the mother taking 
mercy on the child made the child touch his own head, and lo! the head of 
this shadow was also caught. Catch hold of your own head and the shadow is 
also caught. Heaven and hell are within you. The source of power, joy and 
life is within you. The God of men and nature and nations is within you. O 
people of the world! listen, listen. This is a lesson worthy of being 
proclaimed from the house-tops, in all the crossings of big cities, in all 
the thoroughfares. This is a lesson worthy of being proclaimed at the top 
of the voice. If you want to realize an object, if you want to get 
anything, do not hunt after the shadow. Touch your own head. Go within 
you. Realize this and you will see that the stars are your handiwork, you 
will see that all the objects of love, all the bewitching and fascinating 
things are simply your own reflection or shadow. How unreasonable it is 
that—
For a cap and bells our lives we pay,
Bubbles we earn with a whole soul’s tasking.
There is a beautiful story about a woman in India. She lost her needle in 
her house. She was too poor to afford a light in her house, so she went 
out of the house and was searching it in the streets. A gentleman inquired 
from her what she was doing. She said that she was searching for her 
needle? The gentleman asked, "Where did you lose the needle?" She said, 
"In the house." He said, "How unreasonable it is to search in the street a 
thing which was lost in the house!" She said that she could not afford a 
light in the house and there was a lantern in the street. She could not 
hunt in the house, she had to do something, so she must hunt in the 
street.
This is exactly the way with the people. You have the Heaven within you; 
and yet you are searching pleasures in the objects in the streets, 
searching that thing outside, outside in the objects of the senses. How 
strange!
There is another very beautiful story extant in India about a crazy man. 
He came up to the boys of the street and told them that the Mayor of the 
city was preparing a grand, royal feast, and had invited all the children 
to partake of the feast. You know, children like candies and sweets. The 
children being assured by this crazy man of the feast arranged by the 
Mayor, ran to the house of the Mayor, but there was no feast at all, 
nothing of the kind. The children were baffled; they were put out of 
countenance for a while, and there was hansi (laughing), and the children 
said to him, "How is it Mr. that you too came when you knew that this 
story which you told was wrong?" He said, "Lest there be a real feast, 
lest the story be true and I should miss it." For this reason, because he 
did not wish to miss it, he also followed the boys.
Exactly the same is the case of those who by their imagination, by their 
own benediction, you may say, make flowers beautiful, make everything 
desirable by their own imagination and like the crazy man, then, they want 
to run after it, so that they may not miss it.
Conclusion
Realize the Heaven within you, and all at once all the desires are 
fulfilled, all the misery and suffering is put an end to.
Lo! the trees of the wood are my next of kin.
And the rocks alive with what beats in me.
The clay is my flesh, and the fox my skin.
I am fierce with the gadfly and sweet with the bee.
The flower is naught but the bloom of my love.
And the waters run down in the tune I dream.
The Sun is my flower, up hung above.
I cannot die, though forever death
Weave back and fro in the warp of me.
I was never born, yet my births of breath
Are as many as waves on the sleepless sea.
Oh, Heaven is within you, seek Happiness not in the objects of sense; 
realize that Happiness is within yourself.
Om! Om!! Om!!! 
