+++
title = "229 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2013-12-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-December/036114.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-December/036114.html)

एकानेकाक्षरि भुवनेश्वरि
एकानन्दामृतझरि भास्वरि
एकाग्रमनोलयकरि श्रीकरि
एकाम्रेशगृहेश्वरि शंकरि ... कंजदळायताक्षी कामाक्षि

regards,
Sarma.


On Fri, Dec 20, 2013 at 10:29 AM, Vidyasankar Sundaresan <
svidyasankar at hotmail.com> wrote:

> There may be historical reasons for manuscript variations or there may
> have been specific doctrinal reasons for different teachers to teach
> different sequences in a mantra. One must remember that a mantra is chanted
> not just once, but many times in succession. So when establishing a saMtati
> in repeating any mantra, one could parse it either way, without getting too
> bothered about which is "correct".
>
>
>
> Surely, you remember the south Indian story about how vAlmIkI could not
> say the word rAma, but could say mara (= tree), so he was taught to repeat
> marA, marA, marA, ... which by continous repetition over time transformed
> into rAma, rAma, rAma, ...
>
>
>
> The possibility of this happening is what is meant by saying that the
> order does not matter.
>
>
>
> Vidyasankar
>
>
>
>
> > To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> > From: rajaramvenk at gmail.com
> > Date: Tue, 17 Dec 2013 06:09:25 +0000
> > Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Hare Rama
> >
> > I don't know what you mean the order doesn't matter. No one, advaitin or
> otherwise, should change the mantras in the upanishad. it would be
> whimsical. Like I said there are three textual references (two versions of
> the kali santarana manuscript and radha tantra). We should critically
> evaluate the texts.
> >
> > For this mantra, there is no regulation whatsoever as per the upanishad.
> Does any one know what are the 16 kalas of the jIvA talked of in the
> upanishad please?
> >
> >
> > Sent from my BlackBerry® wireless device
> >
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

