+++
title = "28 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024198.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024198.html)

What is this avidyAlesha that continues for the jIvanmukta? It is a part 
(aMsha) of the

viKshepa-shakti of the mUlAvidya (primal avidyA) that consists of AvaraNa 
shakti and 

vikShepa shakti. The avidyalesha is necessary for the continuation of 
prArabdha 

karma, the present body, etc. This is the view of some.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Above statement give us the impression that avidyA has multiple parts, so 
avidyA  can be called sAvayava :-))  what a funny observation...one part 
of this avidyA goes after realization and another part would remain for 
the continuation of the jnAni's body!! It is as good as saying half of the 
chicken gone but still we are getting eggs from the remaining half of the 
chicken :-))  shankara says avidyA is ekarUpa which has three nature 
agrahaNa, anyathagrahaNa & saMshaya & all the three would go after the 
dawn of Atma jnAna...when agrahaNa is completely removed and jnAni 
realizes he is one without second, the 'socalled' AvaraNa would be removed 
without any cover  and he would get the clear cut realization of what he 
is...and now he is 'samyak jnAni !!  In this enlightened nondual state, 
how can vikshepa shakti (which is part of avidyA) still continue to 
influence  the jnAni??  vikshepa is due to AvaraNa is it not??  or does 
this vikshepa shakti has any other cause (otherthan agrahaNa) to continue 
even after the effacement of AvaraNa??  Moreover, if a person is suffering 
from even an iota  of ajnAna/avidya (no matter whether it is AvaraNa or 
vikshepa ) how can we call him paripUrNa jnAni??  God only knows the 
intention of these vyAkhyAnakAra-s.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

