+++
title = "29 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024200.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024200.html)

It is the vipareeta-grahaNam aspect that is again re-stated by
Shankaracharya in the bhashyam for Brahma sutra 4.1.15 as ‘mithyA jnAnam
even though has been sublated, continues owing to samskAra for some 
time….’.
So, even in ChitsukhAcharya’s scheme what is termed ‘avidyA lesha’ is only
this mithyAjnAna (vapreeta grahaNa) that Shankaracharya has stated and
nothing different.  And to say that this element is a ‘lesha’ of mUlAvidyA
is perfectly in order, non-contradictory to the Bhashyam and therefore not
at all defective.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Since you have given clean chit from the first two AkAra-s of avidyA to 
the jnAni / jeevanmukta, I dont have to labour on those aspects of avidyA 
in a jnAni...Thank god :-)) And now, finally  you are saying third AkAra 
i.e. vipareeta grahaNam hinders in a jnAni even after realization...No 
need to say, if avidyA has three Akara-s and out of these three Akara-s 
the socalled jnAni suffers from one of those three AkAra, then that jnAni 
is not a paripUrNa jnAni because  any tinge/bit  of avidya is avidyA only 
and it means avidyA is NOT completely eradicated and hence this person is 
not fit to be called as the jnAni.  After all what is the work of Atma 
vidyA?? shankara himself clarifies the 'work' of vidya in bruhad bhAshya : 
yadi jnAnAbhAvaH yadi saMshayajnAnaM yadi vipareeta jnAnam vA uchyate 
ajnAnamiti sarvaM hi tat jnAnenaiva nivartate...If you still argue that 
jnAni suffers from vipareeta grahaNaM here is one more explicit quote from 
shankara in the same bhAshya :kim ca na ca vipareetapratyayo vidyAvtaH 
upapadyate, nirvishayatvAt ( thanks to Sri Prof. Ramanatha prabhuji for 
bringing this bhAshya vAkya  to my notice) thereby shankara categorically 
saying vipareeta pratyaya would not hold sway in jnAni.  So the real 
knowledge would not allow any traces to remain in a jnAni this jnAna is 
just like a 'sUrya prakAsha' there is no question co-existence of 
tamaH-prakAsha in a jnAni to say vipareeta grahaNaM is one of the AkAra-s 
of avidyA and would continue in a jnAni.  samyagdarshanAt 
asheshakarmakshaya shruteH clarifies shankara in sUtra bhAshya.

With regard to your pet & frequent quote from sUtra bhAshya 4.1.15, I 
think it needs some pAditya pradarshana from me with quotes from shankara 
bhAshya & this bhAshya vAkya needs to be understood based on bhAshya 
vAkya-s with regard to jnAni-s body  from tattusamanvayAt sUtra...That 
home work is still pending prabhuji...let me see when my wife & kids would 
allow me to do it :-)) till then ....

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

PS :  By the way prabhuji, do you know, your split of the compound word : 
mithyAjnAna as mithya jnAna is not in line with vyAkhyAnakAra who says it 
is mithya ajnAna ??  anyway let us discuss about this also in due course 
:-))
