+++
title = "56 K. Sadananda"
date = "2000-08-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001444.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001444.html)

Thanks Vidya for the corrections.   Please be watching so that errors do
not slip through.  I will wait for other inputs before making final
corrections.
Thanks again for taking time.
Regards
Sada


>>  alpaaskharamasamdhigdham saaravat vishhvatomukham|
>>
>
>It should be alpaaksharam....
>
>....
>
>>The definition says sutra has to be  -
>>
>>alpaaskaram - very concise - very brief
>
>alpa + akshara = little + syllables, implying conciseness/brevity,
>by virtue of using the minimum possible no. of words.
>
>>
>>Visvatomukham - having many meanings or many facets if possible.
>>
>
>vishvatomukha means, "facing all sides". Rather than "having
>many meanings," the intention is that the sUtra should address
>a given subject (vishhaya) from all possible angles/perspectives.
>
>As such, this aspect is important not so much for an individual
>sUtra, but with respect to the characteristics of the adhikaraNa
>in which it occurs. Thus, the goal of the sUtra is to set forth
>the vishhaya, to address the saMSaya (doubt) that arises from
>various pUrvapakshha-s (prior stance) originating from other kinds
>of thinking about the subject, by means of arguments that are
>connected to one another in a logical progression (saMgati), and
>finally set forth the conclusions (siddhAnta).
>
>Best wishes,
>Vidyasankar
>
>--
>bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
>Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
>Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.


K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

