+++
title = "412 Balasubramanian Ramakrishnan"
date = "2017-06-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-June/045754.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-June/045754.html)

Hello all,

Recently I acquired two books which will be of interest to students of the
taittirIya shAkhA:

1. taittirIya-yajur-veda pada-pAThaH, edited by vishvanAtha shrautI and
nArAyaNa shastrI in devanagari script. This has a very learned introduction
by the great paNDita yudhiShThira mImAmsaka. I am not sure who has provided
the footnotes, seems to be yudhiShThira mImamAsaka, and this is a unique
feature of this book compared to previous grantha versions available in
Tamil Nadu. Sandhi and other issues when going from the saMhitA to the pada
pATha requires knowledge of veda-lakShaNa and can be quite tricky. The
footnotes provide detailed references to the prAtishAkhya and shikShA texts
when these happen, as well as explanations of these. It's a really
outstanding work of scholarship. The book has been published by the Ramlal
Kapoor Trust in Haryana and is priced at a meager Rs 300, which is a
ridiculously low price for such a fantastic book. The fonts are beautiful,
as is the binding and it is a pleasure to just hold and look through the
book.

2.  kR^iShNa yajurveda taittirIya shAkhA anubandhaH, kuLattu hariharaputra
sharma and released by shrI bhAratI tIrtha svAminaH. It contains fantastic
material such as anuvAkA by anuvAka content description of the entire
taittirIya corpus and cross references to the correct mantra or brAhmaNa
portions for each anuvAka. It's a fantastic compilation and only Rs 200. He
also seems to have put the entire book online at
http://kulathu.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Thaitriya-Samhita-Anubandha-Part1.pdf

Rama
