+++
title = "38 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2020-09-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-September/055518.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-September/055518.html)

It is well known that in the Madhviya Shankara Vijaya the parrot imagery is
used to eulogize the Vedic wealth flourishing in Mandana Misra's household:

स्वतः प्रमाणं परतः प्रमाणं, कीराङ्गना यत्र गिरं गिरन्ति।
द्वारस्थनीड़ान्तरसन्निरुद्धा जानीहि तन् मण्डनपण्डितौकः॥

[Know that to be Mandana Misra's house at the entrance of which parrots
inside the cage utter the words 'are the Veda-s a pramaana by themselves or
are they not?']

There are two more verses in the above sarga (8) with similar
identification to that house, where the कीराङ्गना यत्र गिरं गिरन्ति is
repeated.

Now, in the Periya Puranam of Sekkizhar, the description of a Tamil Saiva
saint
Thiruneela nakka nayanar  - the Vaidika Shaiva saint, we see a somewhat
similar bird imagery to eulogize the rich Vedic tradition in his village:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sekkizhar

The original Tamil verses rendering this Nayanar's story:

https://shaivam.org/thirumurai/twelveth-thirumurai/889/periya-puranam-thiruninra-charukkam-thiru-nila-nakka-nayanar-puranam

Tamil easy poetry and English translation.

https://tinyurl.com/y625ya79

The brahmins here used to light all the three types of fire during their
Vedic ceremonies. The fourth fire people kept alive here was Chastity. *The
birds called NAgaNavAi – which excel in singing – would teach the SAma
vEdam to their young ones along with the brahmin brahmacharis learning SAma
Vedam. If and when the boys committed a mistake the young birds would
correct their mistakes.*

Thiru Neela NakkanAr was born in the family of brahmins. He was a staunch
devotee of Siva. He served the Lord and His devotees to the best of his
capacity. It was his custom to celebrate ThiruvAdhirai day with great joy
and devotion.
https://hindu-mythology-modern-physicists.blogspot.com/2013/

இத்திருத்தலத்தில் வாழ்ந்து வரும் வேதியர்கள் அயவந்திநாதர் மலர்ப்பாதங்களில்
இடையறாது பக்தி பூண்டொழுகி வந்தனர். எந்நேரமும் வேத பாராயணம் ‌‌செய்வர்.
திருவெண்ணீற்றின் பெருமையை உணர்ந்த இம்மறையவர்கள் மூன்று வகையான வைதீகத் தீயை
வளர்ப்பர். இம்மறையவர்களார் மனைத்தக்க மாண்பு உடைய மாதர்களும், தங்களுக்கே
உரித்தான நான்காவது தியாகக் கற்புத் தீயையும் வளர்ப்பர். இம்மறையவர்களிடம்,
அந்தணச் சிறுவர்கள் வேதம் பயில்கின்றபொழுது, சாம வேதம் பாடுகின்ற பூவை என்கிற
நாகணவாய்ப் பறவைகள் தாமும் இவ்வேதங்களைத் தம் குஞ்சுகளுக்குக் கற்பிக்கும்.
சில சமயங்களில் அந்தணச் சிறுவர்கள் வேதம் பயி்ல்கின்றபோது சற்று பிழையாகக்
கூறிவிட்டாலும் உடனே இப்பூவைப் பறவைகள் அச்சிறுவர்களின் தவற்றைத் திருத்திக்
கூறவும் செய்கின்றன. இத்தகைய சீர்மீக்கத் திருச்சாத்த மங்கையில், சீலமிக்க
வேதியர் மரபில் ஆலமுண்ட அண்ணல்பால் அடிமைத் திற பூண்டவராக விளங்கியவர்தான்
திருநீலநக்க நாயனார். இவ்வடியார் வேத நுõல்கள் மொழிவதற்கு ஏற்ப
எம்பெருமானுக்கும், எம்பெருமான் அடியவர்களுக்கும் திருத்தொண்டுகள் யாவும்
புரிந்து நாடோறும் சிவகாம விதிப்படி சிவபெருமானைப் பூசித்து வந்தார். இவ்வாறு
நாயனார், ஒழுகிவரும் நாளில் எம்பெருமானுக்கு உகந்த திருவாதிரை நன்னாள் வந்தது.


There is a misconceived (or mischievous) propaganda that 'vaidikas can't be
Shiva bhaktas' and 'only vaishnavas can be vaidika-s'.

Belying such a fanciful thinking there is evidence in the Tamil Saivite
saints' literature for a great number of vaidikas who were ardent devotees
of Shiva. Here is just one case:  Thiruneela nakka nayanar (the 'nakka' is
a corruption of the Sanskrit word 'nagna', alluding to the Darukavanam
incident)

Om Tat Sat
