+++
title = "41 S.N. Sastri"
date = "2008-04-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/019984.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/019984.html)

Re; uttra gItA ?-

It is not improbable that the Theosophical Society simply made it up
themselves. They are notorious for forging "ancient mystical secrets of
the orient."
Jaldhar H. Vyas


Dear Shri Vyas,
The uttara gItA does not seem to have been made up by the Theosophical
Society. I have with me a book containing the uttara gItA and a commentary
on it by GaudapAda with English translation by Shri V. Srinivasan, published
by The Kanchi Kamakoti peetha, Vyasa Bharata kaladhi Sadas Samajam (Regd),
Madras-600017, (The date of publication is not mentioned in the book, but it
must be recent because Shri V. Srinivasan lived from 1919 to 2003).
In his Introduction the translator says:
   The Catalogus Catalogorum of the Madras University mentions as follows:
     1. The uttara gItApurporting to be from Mahabharata Aswamedhika is
different from Anugita. It was printed with Anandagiri's commentary in
Madras in 1881 and is in British Museum Private Books (1876-92).

In the Bibliography at the end of the book the following publications are
mentioned:
   1.Uttara gita with commentary of Gaudapada, published by
T.K.Balasubramanyam, Vani Vilas Press, Srirangam Tamil Nadu, 1910.  (This
was a well known Press).
    2. Uttara Gita, Gaudapadiya deepika sahita, by G. Mahadeva Sharma,
Gujarati Printing Press, Bombay, 1912.
    3. Uttara Gita with English translation by Sri Lahari,Theosophical
Society, Madras, 1933.
    4. Uttara Gita, Manuscript Nos. 162-169 available at Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, Pune.
    5. Uttara Gita with Saint Jnaneswar's Marathi verse translation, Pune,
1881.
    6. Uttara Gita, German translation, Leipzig, 1907.
Some translations in Tamil and Telugu are also mentioned.
Copies of the English translation by V.Srinivasan can be had from:
1. The Kanchi Kamakoti Peetha, Vyasa Bharata Kaladhi Sadas Samajam,(Regd),
No.2, Sivagnanam Road, T'Nagar, Chennai- 600 017.
2. Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswati Viswa Maha Vidyalayam (Deemed
University), Enathur, Kanchipuram- 630 552
S.N.Sastri

