+++
title = "109 Msr"
date = "1997-05-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006406.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006406.html)

namaami | My respects to you all ||

It is possible to stop the perception of time. When in deep
meditation, when the waves of thoughts are stilled,  one goes to a
deep sleep like state. But unlike a deep sleep state, one is fully
conscious of it. It is like a state of great joy and time flow
ceases. It is like an eternal NOW.  I had this experience once when I was
in SRF ashram during one of the meditation sessions, through guru's
grace (Most of the time I am conscious of the time flow during the
meditation sessions, often impatiently). The 1 hour session
passed like a fraction of a second and it was full of peace and joy.

 But is it possible to have such experiences in a longer time
scale from the point of view of rest of the world. Say few years? Will
the body of the saadhaka age with time (this question arises out of my
dehaatma buddhi!)? Or will it be like the often quoted twin example in
relativity theory?

Aside1:

There is nice story in tripura rahasya which brings out the unreality
of time and space.

Also, if I remember correctly in bhagavata,
bhagavaan kR^ishhNa will give a wonderful experience to narada
mahaR^ishhi through his power of maayaa, in that narada will go
through two birth cycles in a few seconds from kR^ishhNa's point of
view.

Aside2:

These days I am really scared to write anything related
philosophical issues. Whatever I try to say seems to be
wrong and misleading in some sense or other. Words are so
deceptive and confusing. But when it comes to praising
parashaktii and her glories, things seem to be simple and
beautiful! Why so?


dhanyavaadaH
Ravi

"miinalochani paashamochani"

