+++
title = "136 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2006-03-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016107.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-March/016107.html)

Namste Siva Senani Nori-Ji:

  Giitaa is also an Upanishda.  At the end of each chapter we find 
  "
  AUM tatsaditi shriimadbhagavadgiitaasuupanishhatsu ..........
  "

  It is all about understanding.  What tools are used for understanding is totally up to the individual.

  There millions who recite giitaa without understanding.  I recall Chanmayaananada commenting on this reciting giitaa.

  It is not important how many times you go through giitaa but how many times you allow giitaa to go through you.

    If advaita is all about recognition and realization.   If it is OK to study giitaa then why should there be a problem with other texts ?


  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu

Siva Senani Nori <sivasenani at yahoo.com> wrote:
  --- Amuthan wrote:

> dear shrI Siva Senani Nori,
> 
> --- Siva Senani Nori wrote:
> >
> > application of those to a given situation. In the
> > case of vedAnta, then, the
> > proper course to follow would be the upanishats,
> > brahmasUtras, and then finally
> > the gItA.

> i strongly disagree with the above view.
> traditionally, the study of the upaniShad-s is only
> for the 'mature'. 
....
> (btw, even in science, no one teaches quantum
> mechanics to a tenth grader. 

Well said, Sir! I should have considered the context more carefully. My views
on upanishats are only with reference to the gItA. But the context of the
proper time to study upanishats must also have been included. Just to complete
that context, the parts of veda corresponding to the stages of life are:

brahmachAri - samhitA
grihastha - brAmhaNa
vanaprastha - AraNyaka
sam.nyasi - upanishat


Regards
Senani



---------------------------------
Yahoo! Mail
Bring photos to life! New PhotoMail  makes sharing a breeze. 

