+++
title = "04 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2021-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-January/056132.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-January/056132.html)

Jagadguru Sri Vidhushekhara Bharati Swaminah replies in Kannada in this
short video:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAkR_liHVT4&feature=youtu.be

The gist is summarized here in the above page thus:


Samskrta Nandini <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwu74BQetfISxIiI_d5dWNw>2
hours ago
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAkR_liHVT4&lc=UgwyplZ4sjkUadBMDC94AaABAg>
Ep 7 1:45 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAkR_liHVT4&t=105s> Question =
If there is the Nirguna Brahman , how can we do any Saguna worship of it ?
Isn’t doing Saguna roopa to Nirguna Brahman contradictory and against Adi
Shankara’s teachings ? 1:55
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAkR_liHVT4&t=115s> Answer = Adi Shankara
has made it clear throughout each of his books and treatises that Nirguna
Brahman is the goal of all Sadhana, and Saguna Brahman is another stepping
stone in it . Saguna Brahman is the concept of “God” . God is a tool that
the devotee uses to clarify her mind and realize that essence underpins
both the lover and the beloved . All upasanas , Aradhana , tapas , yajnas
etc are but stepping stones in the Sadhana path . The goal is Nirguna
(realizing the Awareness , untouched by any attributes ) , which occurs
only through Jnana because Maya (the superposition of features) is removed. But
This Jnana is not readily acceptable to all , Jnana comes by introspection
and very deep focuessed enbquiry into onseself guided by the Upadesha from
the Guru . Fo such an enquiry , the mind needs certain amount of ease and
balance . This is to be cultured . Few are born gifted . For the rest , the
“pure” mind is to be cultivated . How can it be cultivayed? Through
upasanas like bhakti(-uncondiional devotion to the Saguna Brhaman) , karma
( selfless service to fellow beings) , dhyana ( one-pointedness of the mind
) ,tapas( austerity and control over the senses and body) and ritualistic
aspects like poojas , Yajnas , daana (philanthropy) . Why are there so many
paths? Because there are as many people with as many tastes . (Some prefer
emotional surrender , hence bhakti attracts them . Some are built with
skepticism; for them, dhyana might be suitable . Some are inclined towards
helping and servitude, for them karma would be preferable , etc) Why can’t
Jnana dawn by itself on everybody ? Because of the hold of Maya . In this
world , as long as one abides by the axioms of a transaction ,and functions
thus, trying to preserve the health of one body and happiness of one mind ,
the mind is tumultuous . It cannot understand the Upadesha even if the Guru
personally gives . Why ? Because one’s mind is not ready to inquire ,
question ,and delve deep into its understanding . She may not even
understand .So , the Upadesha and subsequently Jnana arises only in those
whse mind has been purified by the upasanas mentioned above . Why did Adi
SHankara then compose Stotrams ?
Because Adi SHankara recognised that people cannot digest the higher
knowledge and the raw truth . They muyst frist be led by hand , gradually
with devotion , service and concentration to the royal chambers of
knowledge. When even the brightest minds and the sharpest intellects cannot
fully grasp Nirguna Brahman , what to say about us , the commoners ?! Hence
, the stotras like Shivananda lahari , Soundarya lahari etc. have been
composed to help people with an inclination towards bhakti .
