+++
title = "94 Ms. Aikya Param"
date = "1996-10-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-October/005400.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-October/005400.html)

Namaste!

Thank you Sadananda for a well  thought out message.

It may be that a person does not boast about being enlightened because the preceding state of ignorance is not necessarily something to be proud of.  Might a person not be a little sheepish about how mistaken she/he was?

On the other hand, if it is true, if one has gone to the qualified teacher and put in his/her time, has gotten the message clearly, is that person bound to false modesty?  Do we require of that person that he/she may never answer "yes" to the questions "are you enlightened?"  The question itself reveals a certain innocence and longing in the questioner.  It is almost as good a question as "Please teach me what is to be known."  How and when one answers that question may require great wisdom but who are we to say no one may ever say "yes". 

If the one who answers "yes" has qualities of which I do not approve, what have I found out?  If the "yes" is an accurate answer, I have found out that enlightened people are like others on this earth, like myself in fact. This is valuable learning because I am to learn that I am Brahman, even with my own unworthy habits. If that seemingly unworthy person can be "enlightened", then I too can be.  

The answer "yes" is cause for further enquiry.  Perhaps I will learn that enlightenment is not a lifestyle, not a series of religious practices, not a set of clothes, but a certain kind of knowledge.  Once that knowledge is clear,  the personal transformation proceeds at the pace any transformation occurs and in keeping with the laws of the Lord's world.  Once that knowledge is clear, that person is entitled to answer "yes" to the question, "Are you enlightened?"

Ignorance is like a newfangled software.  Bits of the program hide in every corner of the mind/body computer.  If you introduce "The Enlightenment File" of bhramajnanam, the ignorance file becomes deletable.  In the days after the introduction of "The Enlightenment File", the person must do search and replace as he/she goes through daily activities. Any of you who have worked on changing a habit know that wuch change is not instant.  Where is enlightenment?  In our habits? In our thoughts? In our actions?

How long did we take developing our false mask to show the world?  How long did we copy arrogance?  How long did we learn attitudes based in falsehood and ignorance?  How long did we think happiness could be created by a better job, or moving to another place, more money, better sex, or praying more, or becoming well-known?  How long did we think qualities of our body like nationality or color or gender or caste made us "better" than others?  All these hiding ignorance files have to be discovered and deleted.  Who will boast about this?  Who will put this on his business card or in his brochures saying "I am enlightened, therefore I am no longer an arrogant so and so?" Or knowing the expectations of the innocent and longing, and understanding the find and replace process, who will announce "Hello.  Did you know I am enlightened?"   

Aikya     

