+++
title = "31 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-01-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-January/026390.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-January/026390.html)

Dear Sri Jayaraman

On Sun, Jan 16, 2011 at 9:00 AM, S Jayanarayanan <sjayana at yahoo.com> wrote:

> --- On Sat, 1/15/11, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <dvnsarma at gmail.com>
> wrote:
>
> > Dear Sri Jayaraman,
> >
> > I think that this is hardly specific prohibition of
> > garlic.
>
> What part of the statement: "Hence, it is forbidden for sadhakas." is
> difficult to understand?
>
> No. It is your lack of understanding of my expression "too much
importance". That is the problem.
I never said that he did not give importance to food habits. I said he did
not give too much importance.
He did recommend limited, sattvik food. as a help to sadhakas.


> > *
> > *
> > "Sri Bhagavan inquired if she had read the article and
> > said, “People say it
> > is very good for health. Really it is so. It cures
> > rheumatism and gives
> > strength to the body. For children it acts like amrit
> > (nectar). Garlic is
> > also known as amrit.”"
> >
>
> "“That is why it is said that garlic has some of the properties of amrit.
> It is very good for the body. But since it also has the touch of the demon,
> it has tamasic qualities too, which when eaten affect the mind. Hence, it is
> forbidden for sadhakas.”"
>
> Straightforward: Garlic is forbidden for sadhakas.
>
> > The opinion given in a story he has narrated cannot be
> > taken as his opinion.
> >
>

You have not taken this into consideration.


> > You said that I am not right. I have said two things.
> > 1. I said Bhagavan Ramana did not give too much importance
> > to food
> > censoring.
>
> That's false.
>
>
I am right.


> * He says above that garlic is forbidden for Sadhakas.
>
> * He says eggs are not good for the diet:
>
> Talks, # 24, 4th February, 1935
>
> "Mrs. Piggott: Why do you take milk, but not eggs?
> M.: The domesticated cows yield more milk than necessary for their calves
> and they find it a pleasure to be relieved of the milk.
> D.: But the hen cannot contain the eggs?
> M.: But there are potential lives in them."
>
> * V. Subramaniam has already provided a link to a website to more such
> quotes, specifically against meat-eating:
>
> http://bhagavan-ramana.org/diet.html
>
> Mrs. Piggott returned from Madras for a further visit. She asked questions
> relating to diet regulation.
>
> D.: What diet is prescribed for a sadhak (one who is engaged in spiritual
> practices)?
>
> M.: Satvic food in limited quantities.
>
> D.: What is satvic food?
>
> M.: Bread, fruits, vegetables, milk, etc.
>
> D.: Some people take fish in North India. May it be done? No answer was
> made by the Maharshi.
>
>
See he does not prohibit.



> D.: We Europeans are accustomed to a particular diet; change of diet
> affects health and weakens the mind. Is it not necessary to keep up physical
> health?
>
> M.: Quite necessary. The weaker the body the stronger the mind grows.
>
>
Can You  discern the meaning of this. Think.


> D.: In the absence of our usual diet our health suffers and the mind loses
> strength.
>
> M.: What do you mean by strength of mind?
>
> D.: The power to eliminate worldly attachment.
>
> M.: The quality of food influences the mind. The mind feeds on the food
> consumed.
>
> D.: Really! How can the Europeans adjust themselves to satvic food only?
>
> M.: (Pointing to Mr. Evans-Wentz) You have been taking our food. Do you
> feel uncomfortable on that account?
>
> Mr. Evans-Wentz: No. Because I am accustomed to it.
>
> D.: What about those not so accustomed?
>
> M.: Habit is only adjustment to the environment. It is the mind that
> matters. The fact is that the mind has been trained to think certain foods
> tasty and good. The food material is to be had both in vegetarian and
> non-vegetarian diet equally well. But the mind desires such food as it is
> accustomed to and considers tasty.
>
> D.: Are there restrictions for the realised man in a similar manner?
>
> M.: No. He is steady and not influenced by the food he takes.
>
> D.: Is it not killing life to prepare meat diet?
>
> M.: Ahimsa stands foremost in the code of discipline for the yogis.
>
> D.: Even plants have life.
>
> M.: So too the slabs you sit on!
>
> D.: May we gradually get ourselves accustomed to vegetarian food?
>
> M.: Yes. That is the way.
>
> ~ Talk 22, Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
>
>
You missed the most important  sentence in the website quoted by Sri
V.Subrahmaniam.

"It was characteristic of Bhagavan that he would never enjoin vegetarianism
on any devotee unless asked, but if asked he was quite categorical about
it."

If you ponder over that sentence you will know attitude of Bhagavan in this
matter. If he thought that vegetarianism is absolutely necessary for
sadhakas he would
have recommended it whether asked or not. When asked he recommended it
because it is helpful to sadhakas and he always treated animals with full
consideration and their slaughter was painful to him.

Dear Sri Jayaraman, you must be already aware of the story of Vatapi and
Ilvala. Sage Agstya was a meat eater. That great Brahmarshi
Vasishta was a meat eater and so on.

Therefore my statement That Bhagavan did not give too much importance to
 food censoring is correct.

regards,
Sarma.



> > 2. He used to make fun of his mother's food habits.
>
>
> > Which of these statements is not right?
> >
> > Bhagavan Ramana advocated the attainment of a state that
> > should not be
> > disturbed by
> > the food you take.
> >
> > regards,
> > Sarma.
>

