+++
title = "126 srikanta"
date = "2010-10-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-October/025663.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-October/025663.html)














I think this misunderstands the intention of Sri Siva Senani Nori, the
poster who wrote
about this. What was intended is that anyone who sleeps, dreams and wakes
up can
sit and examine this process logically, without any prior exposure to the
Vedas or even
without any SraddhA in the veda.

Whether such an independent analysis will be consonant with or converge
with the
avasthAtraya parIkshA taught in the veda is a different question.

Regards,
Vidyasankar
_________________________________

It is absolutely not possible to examine the three avasthas logically if
one doesnot understand the Mandukya Upanishad and the Gaudapada
Karikas,which are based on the vedas.The Mandukya Upanishad is in
Atharvana veda.The jagrath,svapna and the susupti states donot have a
sequence as we really see and believe.This is explained in the IInd
prakarana which is called "Vaithathya prakarana".In all the three
states,the sakshi or the witness remains unchanged.One who has not exposed
to the Mandukya Upanishad and the Karikas will never come to the purport
of the Mandukya Upanishad.He will just wakeup,dreams and go to deep sleep
without this analysis.In the deep sleep state the concept "Ishwara"is
brought synonymous with "Prajna"(na antah prajnah,na bahishpajnah,na
ubhayataprajnah)this the source of every thing.The Upanishad goes further
to introducethe IV th  state called the "Turiya".Will an independent
analysis be able to do so meticulously as the Upanishad?.There is no other
Gaudapada to do this.
Bhava Shankara Desika me sharanam.                    N.Srikanta



