+++
title = "66 srikanta at nie.ac.in"
date = "2008-04-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/020002.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/020002.html)

In his Email of April 28,2008,sri.Subramanya writes that Sri.Shankara in
his Soundaryalahari gives his explanation of the raising of the Kundalini
Shakthi following Patanjali.While it is debatable that Shankara wrote the
Soundaryalahari,in his Prasnopanishad Bhashya,while discussing the
different Vayus(vital airs) like Prana,apana,udana etc.Shankara mentions
about the Thousands of nadis and how the dream is produced in a human
being.In his Karikas on the Mandukyopanishad Acharya Gaudapada takes
course to Yoga method of explanation.As it is generally understood,Yoga
concerns itself about the direct realisation of Atman(Brahman) by
cittavrtti nirodha.In Brahmasutra Bhashya Shankara sometimes mentions
about"as the Yogis realise".As one carefully goes through the Yoga
sutras,Brahmasutras,there must have existed a unified approach  which
includes Yoga and Vedanta in the adoptation of Yoga techniques for the
Sadhaka for the realisation of God.In the BhagawadGita,especially in the
"sthithaprajna section",in many of the stanzas,we can discern Yoga
terminology.For example,In "dukheshu anudvigna manah sukeshu vigata
sprhaha,vita raga bhayakrodhah sthitadhir munirruchyati"Yatatohyapi
kaunteya purushasya vipaschitaha,Indriyani pramathini haranti prasabham
manah,Tani samyani samyamya yuktaasita matparah,vashe hi yasyendriyani
tasya prajnya prathisthita,Yada samharate chayam kurmongani ca
sarvashah,vashe his yasyendriyani tasya pragnya prathisthita" and many
more.
In his "manasollasa" said to have been written by Sureshwaracharya,there
are many explanations based on the Yoga concepts.It is a common
practice,that Sanyasis must engage themselves in Yoga daily.
Bhava Shankara Desika me sharanam.                       N.srikanta.



