+++
title = "210 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2010-12-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026269.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026269.html)

Hari Om Shri Sunil Bhattarcharjyaji, Pranaams!

You mean to say 'the upaniShad that teaches IshAvAsyam (Ishvara is vyApakam) 
is IshAvAsyopaniShad'.

If 'IshAvAsyopaniShad' is considered as compound and split; it should become 
' the upaniShad which starts with the words IshAvAsyam' like you will split 
'kenopaniShad' as 'the upaniShad which starts with the words kena'. 
(IshAvAsyamityAdi padaiH Arambhakam upaniShadam yat tat).

The very first word of the upaniShad 'IshAvAsyam' is in improper form and 
needs correction.  While applying correction, it is brought into a form as 
per the intention of the commentator whether he wants to keep it as a 
declaration statement or teaching imparting injunction.

When treating as a statement declaring the truth, it can be made(corrected 
to become) a compound word - 'Isha-vAsitam' to be split as Ishvarena vAsitam 
(enveloped by Lord).

But AcAryaji takes it to mean as teaching (vidhi-vAkya) which is what 
explained by Swami Tejomayanandaji. Here IshA  is a separate word and vAsyam 
will be separate word and cannot be make a compound word. vAsyam will be 
changed to corrected form of vasa or alternate form vasatAt if vas verb 
taken in 1st  conjugation Parasmaipadi or vassva in 2nd conjugation 
Atmanepadi. (Since 'IshA' is noun and 'vasa or vasatAt or vassva' is verb, 
they cannot be compounded.)

Hence the first two words of upaniShad will read as ' IshA vasa' or 'IshA 
vasatAt' or 'IshA vassva'. 'IshA' is already in instrumental case. ('IT' 
shabdasya tR^itIyA-ekavacanam IshA).

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya






--------------------------------------------------
From: "kuntimaddi sadananda" <kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com>
Sent: Friday, December 24, 2010 6:14 AM
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" 
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] IshAvAsyopanishad articles

> Sunilji - PraNAms
>
> What you say is possible. What I have given is what Swami Tejomayanandaji 
> has provided for the word meaning of vaasyam and kurvan in the next sloka 
> and one needs to read the entire article to see the profoundness of the 
> upanishad teaching.
>
> Hari Om!
> Sadananda
>
>
>
> --- On Thu, 12/23/10, Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com> 
> wrote:
>
>
> From: Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] IshAvAsyopanishad articles
> To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" 
> <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> Date: Thursday, December 23, 2010, 2:20 PM
>
>
> Namaste Sadanandaji,
>
> Can we say that the compound word "Ishaavaasyopanishad" as indicating the 
> "Upanishad related to Ishaavaasa (Isha + aavaasa or Ishasya aavaasa ie 
> where Isha resides), which means the Upanishad tells us that Isha is 
> Vyaapakam in all these, ie., Isha has no separate existence  from the 
> creation or Isha is not separate from this world?
>
> Regards,
>
> Sunil KB
>
> --- On Thu, 12/23/10, kuntimaddi sadananda <kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com> 
> wrote:
>
> From: kuntimaddi sadananda <kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com>
> Subject: [Advaita-l] IshAvAsyopanishad articles
> To: advaitin at yahoogroups.com, "adviata-l" 
> <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> Date: Thursday, December 23, 2010, 5:46 AM
>
> PraNAms to all
>
> After arriving in India I went to attend inauguration of Chinmaya Surya 
> mission and Temple in Ponducheri, TN and I was also blessed with the 
> discourses by Swami Tejomayanandaji on IshvAsyaopanishad and Gita Ch. 7. 
> Swamiji made a unique presentation, particularly of sloka 1 and 2. I could 
> not but share that knowledge in the form that I know and these series are 
> being posted in the advaita-academy.org for those who are interested. The 
> reference is given below.
>
> Hari Om!
> Sadananda
>
>
>
> http://advaita-academy.org/Talks/IshAvAsyopanishad-Series.ashx
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 

