+++
title = "01 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2008-11-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-November/020933.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-November/020933.html)

Namaste Narayan Iyer-Ji:

Let me give you some illustrationsthat mayclarify the issue further.

Personally, I am convinced all the knowledge that has ever been documented or per say exists has some application and it is up to us to find the related utility. This in my opinion that utility is the real spirituality.

>>>>
>>>>
Your interpretation of possible significance of doing "sandhyaavandana" appeals to me. However, I find it surprising (as you do also, I think) that such messages exhorting use of veda for the so-called "vyavahaaric" mundane purposes, meets with stony silence from other members.
<<<<
<<<<

a. vyaharic is not mundane be cause one lives in it until one dies. Therefore, our ancestors tried to pass on their knowledge for our benefit for better living, which is our real inheritance.

b. What ever one one does for their has a limited value but when that applies to a larger model of society) then it starts getting importance (larger than life).

c. All the saints in the past gave up their individual family and adopted a larger family of the society by breaking or rather increasing their circle of influence to larger masses. This is not just limited to Indian saints but also applies to Western folks as well. One may or may not like, why Mother Theresa came to India (essentially to spread Christianity) but she did serve the Indian society without personal reservations and that is why people started call her Saint! IMO - This is an excellent example of "sarvahuta yaj~na" where, she oblated everything including herself. Our religious and social reformers should that she was converting but was that not her primary objective in the first place. So she did achieve what she wanted (a kaaamya karmaa) !!.

>>>>
>>>>
However, as regards your interpretation of "sandhyaavandana", I have the following queries, which I will be glad if you would clarify.

1. How does doing "sandhyaavandana" during pra-dosha kala help me to combat disease spreading 'virus/es' which are rampant during the junctions of sandhyas. There are after all no homa/yagna and there is no smoke/ fume to counter the invisible bacteria. Whether we have willy-nilly given up the subsequent (and actually the needful) rite of samitha-daana/ aupasana ?
<<<<
<<<<

a. The answer is simple one needs to practice any rituals only after cleansing their physical own body first.

b. Just remaining alert that transition times are the most likely to be harmful is often sufficient. For Example: As the rainy season approaches one needs to make sure that that just removing the areas where water stagnates around one's property will reduce the larval mosquito outbreak. Also, if one starts drinking boiled water could avoid and save oneself from typhoid and cholera and other water bourne diseases.

c. Also, one needs to go beyond the the conventional (now I will call it mundane - Homa) concept of home to various situations in their own lives.

For Example: When a new boss take over the office that also needs to be classified as a "Pradesh kaala". One needs to be on their best behavior and try to estimate the directing the new person is likely to chart. If one becomes successful in achieving through his own efforts "svaadhyaaya" then he may be able to save his position in the organization. However, if one still remains attached to the oldboss and his way of doing thing and remain un-willing to change then the new boss fires the personwithout blinking his eyes. This is the application of "sadhyaavandanam" to everyday situation. 

This can be applicable to emergence of a new political party that takes over at the Central office. Some folks who remain loyal to their old bosses also gain dividends for their loyalty when their bosses re-gain power. The whole idea is remaining alert and continuously watch out for potential pot-holes in our path.

I am sure you will be able to find lot more on your own.

>>>
>>>
2. It is extolled that doing sandhya in cow-pen and river beds as the "uttam". How can these places to be considered as more hygenic? 
<<<
<<<

Honestly, I really do not have a scientific answer for this, however,that may have been the cheapest material available to them. By applyinga thing coat of cow dung in water they were able to maintain a small area by sealing the small any borrows and possibly preventing other cowling insects as well !?

>>>>
>>>>
3. Whether the modern hindus have come up with any new explanation for doing sandhya? I help my nephew with studies and explain him that sun never sets or rises and it is the earth orbiting on its axis and during sandhya I tell him that some unknown raakshaas are about to swallow the sun and I protect him by giving him arghya? Do you think he will buy the utterly conflicting theories?
<<<<
<<<<

Larger application of "sandhyavandanam" needs to be practiced rather than getting trapped into the "mundane ritual" itself,as illustrated above.

Although, Sunnever sets. Is it not setting continuously at some part or location on this Earth?

Ultimately, we learn from our ownmistakes and nitya karma helps helps us maintain some "shuddhi" (physical as well internal), however,the idea is to become genius by learning from the mistakes or misfortunes of others.

By the way, I hope to be publishing my book on the "Significance of Rituals" in the near future that tries to furnish practical utility to some of the rituals that find universal application. If this is the applicable to situations regardless of the confinements of any nations or the time period then I need to classified asa "tri-kaalaatiita satya" as the the real spirituality.

Just some thoughts.

With regards,

Dr. Yadu


--- On Sun, 11/2/08, narayan iyer <z1e1b1r1a at yahoo.com> wrote:

From: narayan iyer <z1e1b1r1a at yahoo.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Fw: Re: Meditation Vs nitya karma
To: ymoharir at yahoo.com
Date: Sunday, November 2, 2008, 11:12 PM

Namaste Dr. Yadu,

Your interpretation of possible significance of doing
"sandhyaavandana" appeals to me.  However, I find it surprising (as
you do also, I think) that such messages exhorting use of veda for the so-called
"vyavahaaric" mundane purposes, meets with stony silence from other
members.

However, as regards your interpretation of "sandhyaavandana", I have
the following queries, which I will be glad if you would clarify.

1. How does doing "sandhyaavandana" during pra-dosha kala help me to
combat disease spreading 'virus/es' which are rampant during the
junctions of sandhyas.  There are after all no homa/yagna and there is no smoke/
fume to counter the invisible bacteria.  Whether we have willy-nilly given up
the subsequent (and actually the needful) rite of samitha-daana/ aupasana ?

2. It is extolled that doing sandhya in cow-pen and river beds as the
"uttam".  How can these places to be considered as more hygenic?  

3. Whether the modern hindus have come up with any new explanation for doing
sandhya?  I help my nephew with studies and explain him that sun never sets or
rises and it is the earth orbiting on its axis and during sandhya I tell him
that some unknown raakshaas are about to swallow the sun and I protect him by
giving him arghya?  Do you think he will buy the utterly conflicting theories?

With regards,

narayan



--- On Fri, 10/31/08, Dr. Yadu Moharir <ymoharir at yahoo.com> wrote:

> From: Dr. Yadu Moharir <ymoharir at yahoo.com>
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Fw: Re:  Meditation Vs nitya karma
> To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> Date: Friday, October 31, 2008, 8:51 PM
> Namaste:
> 
> Dear all:
> 
> Ifoneunderstands the significance why was
> "sandhyaavandana" might have been prescribed in
> the first as a part of one's dinacaryaaby our
> ancestors automatically answer the query about nityakarma.
> 










