+++
title = "118 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2009-04-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021735.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021735.html)

Namaste Sunil-Ji:

Probably the verse you may be thinking about is -

itihaasapuraaNaabhyaa.m veda.m samupabR^i.mhayet . bibhetyalpashrutaadvedo maamaya.m prahariShyati (ma. bhaa. Adiparva 1.293.-294.)

Meaning - Veda needs to be understood with the help of history and purana. Veda thinks that these partially learned folks are going to hit them (misinterpret the meaning).

IMHO - Knowledge in Veda is apauruSheya not the text as we know it. Our sages observed the knowledgeas a draShTaa and documented it as important piece of information for future generations. Veda also contain important information regarding medicinal herbs and their specific Homa described in relevant brahmaNaa's. I hope to be publishing my observation some time in the form of a book. Where the properties of specific herbs remain "apauruSheya"and the sages who observed the corresponding use became the dR^iShTaa for those R^icaa.

Just like gravity is apauruSheya but Newton observed and documented how it functions and it's relevance to our lives. Therefore Newton is no less than a R^iShi.

Just my $0.02

Regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Tue, 4/14/09, Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com> wrote:


From: Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Pancikarana vs. Trivrtkarana (analysis)
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Tuesday, April 14, 2009, 10:27 PM


Bhaskarji,

Chandogya upanishad calls them as the fifth veda and not me please. Mahabharata says that without reading them one should not read the Vedas so they may not be all that any later composition. As itihasa isone of the five essential criteria for the puranas the itihasa portion went on getting updated from time to time. So the antiquity of the puranas is not any lesser than that of the Vedas. There is an ancient verse saying this though I do not recollect that verse right now.

Sunil K. Bhattacharjya

--- On Tue, 4/14/09, Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com> wrote:


From: Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Pancikarana vs. Trivrtkarana (analysis)
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Tuesday, April 14, 2009, 9:11 PM



As the Puranas tell us that all the Vedas and the Puranas together were
called Yajurveda before Vedavyasa undertook the division of the Vedas into
the four Vedas and relegated the Puranas as the fifth Veda.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

History believes that one veda has been divided by vedavyAsa into four
veda-s and written purANas (ashtAdasha - 18 purANa-s) for those who donot
have the adhikAra to do vedAdhyayana & understand the same...I dont think
there is any mention that purANa-s have co-existed with veda-s even before
the division!! that is the reason why vedic saMpradAya believes veda is
aparusheya and smruti & purANa etc. are paurusheya texts...Calling purANa-s
as fifth veda is just an acclamation :-) AFAIK, Ayurveda, music etc. also
will come under this fifth veda category..

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



   
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org





