+++
title = "127 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2009-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021748.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021748.html)


praNAms Sri Yadu prabhuji
Hare Krishna

I do completely agree with you prabhuji that one should recite maNtra-s
knowing its meaning & viniyOga...But my question is entirely
different..Since you said ONLY knowledge is apaurusheya and the
words/maNtra-s that depict the knowledge is the composition of Rishi-s
(implying text of the veda is paurusheya) I asked my doubt why we should
not change these texts in a more clear & readable way!!  After all, you
agree with me changing the words, grammer in veda-s would not bring any
change to the knowledge that is representing by it...Instead 'changed'
maNtra-s with simple and readable manner, complying with strict rules of
grammer would reach more people without any complications &
controversies...But why nobody tried their hands in this direction sofar??
Why still we are believing only some set of texts as apaurusheya and other
texts as paurusheya??  Dont you think paurusheya texts (like smruti, purAna
etc.)  also contain the apaurusheya knowledge??  but then why we give
apaurusheya status to ONLY veda-s & paurusheya status to smruti &
purANa-s??

With regard to your quote from Rigveda about 'guptAnga' of stree, maNtra-s
like this we can find a plenty in saMhita-s, brahmaNa-s & AraNyaka-s...But
that does not mean these veda maNtra-s have been written 'after' these
incidents & Rishi-s who physically seen these incidents !!  can we say
after the invention of 'nail cutter' chAndOgya has been written by some
Rishi by taking this example?? can we say after nachiketa's journey to
yamalOka, kaTha has been written??  In one of the upanishads there is a
long list of brahma jnAni-s (muNdaka I think!!), can we say after the life
time of all these rishi-s, some other rishi listed these names in that
upanishad after reading the biographies of those Rishi-s??

kAnchi mahaswamigal observes that veda-s (texts) are infinite and it is not
a composition of any rishi and the rishi has seen/hear  the particular
maNtra, hence we prostrate before him & remember him as maNtra drashtra and
not as maNtra karta ...Kindly refer Hindu dharma chapter 8 to 16 with
regard to this.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
