+++
title = "14 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2009-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021694.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-April/021694.html)

Anubhutisvarupacarya, as you may be aware, makes derogatory statements
against Vacaspati like â€˜Mandana prsta-sevi and so on.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Kindly pardon me I am not writing here to contribute anything worthy to the
ongoing discussions between two champions of advaita vedanta..But it is
really agonizing to see the derogatory exchanges between bhAmati & vivaraNa
Acharya-s that too in shankara bhagavatpAda's advaita sampradAya!! Sri SSS
has observed in one of his works that post shankara Acharya-s were not so
friendly among themselves while propagating their respective school's views
& they have squabbled each other at below average level!!...But I did not
know that it is at this level!!

While on the subject, I humbly request either Sri Vidya prabhuji or Sri
Devanathan prabhuji to educate us briefly about what exactly is
paNchikaraNa and trivrtkaraNa ?? what are the implications of these two
methodologies in advaita siddhAnta nirNaya in general & srushti prakriya in
particular?? and also let the readers know how
favouring/supporting/believing in any one of these two systems would hamper
one's path of brahma jignAsa...Is it so necessary to make it a big issue
when srushti prakriya itself ultimately being questioned in advaita??

I've Sri Vidya prabhuji's paNchikaraNa article with me but in that article
I dont think he has touched these questions in detail.

Kindly pardon me for this digression..My intention is not to pick later
Acharya-s in tradition, but it is painful to note our advaita acharya-s
have gone to such low level in an effort of advocating their siddhAnta !!

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
