+++
title = "16 Venkatesh Murthy"
date = "2015-06-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-June/038605.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-June/038605.html)

Namaste

Advaiti response - Vaaidiraaja has two objections. He is saying
Advaitis should not take वाच्यार्थ Literal meaning for 'Tat Tvam Asi'
and other Abheda Srutis. He is also saying Advaitis have to give
importance to Sense Perception Pratyaksha. The meaning for Sruti Vakya
should not be againts Sense Perception. Nobody has the Sense
Perception experience for 'I am Brahman'. Therefore it is not correct
to say 'I am Brahman' literally.

First Objection response - He has wasted his effort. Because Advaitis
are not taking Literal meaning for 'Tat Tvam Asi' and other Maha
Vakyas. They are using Jahadajahallakshana method.

For the sentence 'I am Brahman' and 'You are That' we have to follow
the same Jahadajahallaxanaa method. Ishwara is Universal Consciousness
and Jeeva is Individual Consciousness. The Universal Consciousness is
because of some Upadhis like being the Lord of all, having all powers,
having knowledge of all Sarvajnatva and so on. The
Individual Consciousness is also because of some Upadhis like having
limited power, limited knowledge and so on. But we have to reject the
Upadhis of both and take only Consciousness. Why? Because the Upadhis
are not real. Then both Ishwara and Jeeva are the same Consciousness.

He can see Advaitis are not taking  वाच्यार्थ here.

Second Objection response - Sense Perception is not stronger than
Sruti. Animals believe in Sense Perception. We have to be different.
Sruti Pramana is available to us but not animals. There was discussion
here on Pratyaksha and Sruti. Kindly see the debate -
http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-October/037611.html

We can use Apaccheda Nyaya from Mimamsa to say Sense Perception can be
invalidated by Sruti. Even everyday we can see Sense Perception is not
always true. It is telling us Sun is going round the Earth. But we
know the truth is Earth is going round the Sun. If you object Sunrise
and Sunset are giving pleasure to people on the beach we say even
false things can give pleasure. When you see a movie on a screen you
can enjoy it even though you know the movie is not real. In a dream
you can enjoy good things and after waking up also you can enjoy the
good feeling of the dream.

Commentary - Vaadiraaja has bowled a no-ball. The Umpire has awarded a
free hit to the batsman. The next ball he hits it over long on for a
six.

-- 
Regards

-Venkatesh
