+++
title = "339 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2012-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-January/030521.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-January/030521.html)

Gopalakrishnan
--------------

Certain unknown Laws positioned the event of my birth in a middle-class, 
South-Indian Brahmin family in a place called SRIRANGAM, Trichy Dist. of 
TamilNadu, India, gifting me parents who were knowledged about Ishvara and 
their blood molecules having absorbed the religious traditions of Karma 
Kanda.

I happened to have my schooling in Chinmaya till my 10th std. and the 
strong fabric of spiritual, psychic layers generated in the school where 
compassion was the only stream gushing forth from the heads of Teachers & 
Swamijis still shape my unconscious, making me ponder over the Vedic 
thoughts.

Not knowing that I was a victim to the most-dreaded serpent of samsara, 
seeking a career in the maddening world according to my own perception, I 
graduated in Chemical Engg from UICT, Mumbai and been working in an Oil 
and Gas firm for the last 5 years. Staying away from parents, having to 
live with people whose wavelengths do not match mine, sight of girls who 
are dressed in a complicated manner compared to my hometown,a long, 
unbroken stomach infection in the intestinal tissues gave my unconscious 
the energy to topple me and handcuff me with the forces of Sorrow. I found 
myself a wanting and limited person on all frontiers.

Some divine grace interferred in my life and I pciked up the teachings of 
Swami Vivekananda, Swami Chinmayananda and Pujya Swami Dayananda Saraswati 
after which I have understood the ground realities due to which my ground 
will never sink again in to the ocean of sorrow.

I did the Advanced 1 year Postal course with Chinmaya International 
Foundation which gave me grand entry to the portals of Vedanta. I have 
also gone through the books of Swami Vivekananda and then finally landed 
up with SDS' books. Prayer Guide, Exploring Vedanta, Need for cognitive 
change, Kenopanisad, Sri Rudram are some of his works I have completed. I 
also follow some of his Western disciples' teachings such as Dr. Carol 
Whitefiled and James Swartz.

Also I follow the books of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung to see their take 
on psychic order. I read the novels of Agatha Christie, Sherlock Holmes, 
Shakespeare which delve in to philosophy.

Iam open for knowledge in this life-saving teaching called ADVAITA 
preparing a package of hungry senses, razor-sharp mind and discriminating 
intellect. Will try my best to be an active member.







