+++
title = "218 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-04-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024380.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024380.html)

He concludes adhyAsa bhAshya thus - "asyAnarthahetoH prahANAya atmaikatva
vidyA pratipattaye sarve vedAnta Arabhyante| yathA cAyamarthaH sarveSAm
vedAntAnAm tathA vayamasyAm sArirakamImAmsAyAm pradarshayiShAmaH |" This
blunder (mutual super imposition of Atma-anAtma) is the cause of all world
delusion. All upanishads begin to destroy this ignorance completely and
teach self knowledge. We will proceed to show how this is understood to be
the central teaching of all upanishads through this sArirakamImAmsa.
[Translation is mine]

This is indeed the context of bandha and moksha.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

I like the way you argue for each & everything with such an enthu :-)) 

See prabhuji, here context is 'avidyA' and its usage in prasthAna trayi 
bhAshya as 'adhyAsa'.  Please note this is NOT the context of bandha & 
mOksha & it is not the discussion about 'what needs for liberation'...When 
you are analysing the cause for 'bandha' you can not quote a sentence that 
is talking about 'mOksha' :-)) Yes, there is a mention of self knowledge 
in the above bhAshya vAkya but what shankara contextually explaining here 
is which is that 'anarthahetu'...and sAvitri mAtAji quoted above bhAshya 
vAkya to show you mutual superimposition (anyOnyAdhyAsa / adhyAsa) is the 
main cause for our bandha and the term avidyA mainly used in prasthAna 
trayi bhAshya as adhyAsa only, that is what she is arguing with you..is it 
not??  ...For this you have come out with a quote & said "No, for 
liberation mAndUkya is enough " :-))  See, how absurd & out of context 
your quote is!!!  Like this you have quoted somany bhAshyA vAkya-s out of 
context to prove avidyA= mAyA...If time permits I shall take all those 
bhAshya vAkya-s in detail to prove how those quotes are hardly near to 
your contention i.e. avidyA=mAya.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

