+++
title = "84 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-08-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001478.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001478.html)

Yes.  xaya thithi can cause confusion.  But that happens only when that
thithi starts after sunrise and ends before next sunrise.  In other words,
thithi for a given day, is decided based on the cycle of the moon at the
time of
"sUryodaya" (or aruNodaya in some traditions).  If the kshaya thithi was
operational during the sUryodaya, then that day is considered as the thithi
for (that particular) celebration.

The naxatra for a given day (for purposes of celebrations) also follows the
same rules.

----- Original Message -----
From: Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
To: <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
Sent: Sunday, August 27, 2000 10:19 PM
Subject: Re: Krishna Janmashtami


> On Mon, 28 Aug 2000, Vidyasankar Sundaresan wrote:
>
> > There are different traditions in the north and the south regarding
Hanuman
> > Jayanti. It all depends on the local calendar that people use.
> >
>
> It also depends on the Sampradaya too.  The problem is the calander we
> usually use these days is based on the cycles of both the Sun and the
> Moon.  A Solar year is 365.25 days whereas 12 lunar months come up to just
> over 354 days.  Therefore sometimes a tithi only lasts for part of a day
> in which case it is skipped (kshaya) and sometime it stretches over two
> days (vrddha.)  And  occasionally a "leap"(adhika) month has to be added.
>
> In the case of an utsava fallng on a kshaya tithi, Smartas selebrate it on
> the tithi before while Vaishnavas celebrate it the day after.  For
> example the mandir I go to which follows Vallabha sampradaya celebrated
> this last ekadashi on Saturday (Shravana Krishna 12)  while I celebrated
> it on Friday (Shravana Krishna 10.) If an utsava falls on a vrddha tithi
> Smartas celebrate it on the first day whereas Vaishnavas celebrate on the
> second.
>
> --
> Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>
> --
> bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
> Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
> Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.
>

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

