+++
title = "86 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-08-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001486.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001486.html)

Thank you very much.  I did not know about it.
Just out of curiosity, which smruti talks about this ?

----- Original Message -----
From: Anand Hudli <anandhudli at HOTMAIL.COM>
To: <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
Sent: Monday, August 28, 2000 7:00 PM
Subject: Re: Krishna Janmashtami


> On Sun, 27 Aug 2000 23:12:17 -0400, S. V. Subrahmanian
> <svskotra at HOTMAIL.COM> wrote:
>
> >Yes.  xaya thithi can cause confusion.  But that happens only when that
> >thithi starts after sunrise and ends before next sunrise.  In other
words,
> >thithi for a given day, is decided based on the cycle of the moon at the
> >time of
> >"sUryodaya" (or aruNodaya in some traditions).  If the kshaya thithi was
> >operational during the sUryodaya, then that day is considered as the
thithi
> >for (that particular) celebration.
> >
> >The naxatra for a given day (for purposes of celebrations) also follows
the
> >same rules.
>
>  Actually, rather than whether a tithi is xaya or adhika, what is more
>  important in general for observances is the concept of viddha and
>  shuddha. A titthi, t, is viddhA if on the day of its occurrence,
>  also occurs tithi (t - 1) (modulo 15, of course) partially. It is
>  shuddhA if on the day of occurrence, (t - 1) does not so occur.
>  The importance of viddhA and shuddhA tithi's arises, for example, in
>  the case of determining ekAdashI. The bhAgavata (smArta) ekAdashI
>  should NOT be a viddhA  tithi. Actually, it requires that the
>  preceding dashamI should have ended at least 1 hour 36 minutes before
>  sunrise on the day when ekAdashI is observed.
>
>  Again, in general, when a tithi for an observance is viddhA, we have
>  four possibilities because there are two days which become possible
>  candidates for the observance, not one as would be the case for a
>  shuddhA tithi. 1) The tithi t, required for the observance, prevails
>  during the time for the observance (example, midnight) on both days,
>  ie the day on which the tithi is viddhA and the next day. 2) the tithi
>  prevails during the time for the observance on the first day but not
>  the second day, 3) the tithi prevails during the time for the observance
>  on the second day but not the first day, and 4) the tithi does not
>  prevail during the time for the observance on either day.
>
>  Depending on the particular tradition, the rule for fixing the date
>  of the observance is arrived at. For example, the rule for JanmaShTamI
>  is: if condition 1) or 4) holds, then the date of observance will be
>  the second day, if 2) holds, the first day, or if 3) holds, the
>  second day.
>
>  The same approach is also used for naxatra-based observances.
>
>
>  Anand
>
> --
> bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
> Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
> Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.
>

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

