+++
title = "07 Bhadraiah Mallampalli"
date = "2002-12-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-December/004196.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-December/004196.html)

Apologies for a blunder.

I wrote..
>Dharma is not meant for offering any ultimate realization. There are >four
>aspects of life : dharma, artha, kama, moksha.

Dharma can very well offer a route to ultimate realization.

Rgveda has a verse that tells how a king must look after his subjects
equally. I will dig it out from a different list.

Also, maintaining dharma and taking care of all living cells equally within
the body and respecting every deva in the body/mind is also a form of
dharma, which again leads to realization.

I am not sure if artha by itself can lead to realization. This needs to be
looked into.

Br.U 1.4.15 explains how kama can lead to ultimate realization by giving a
different interpretation to the word kama.

'Let me have a wife, so tha tI may be born as praja (praja is not only son,
but also daughter), let me have wealth so that I may perform rites'

and says

'This much indeed is desire. Even if one wishes one can not get more than
this'.

This means asking for anything more than this is not even fit to be called
desire. People can get more than this, but only by theft because it was not
sanctioned. Then the upanishat goes on to explain the personal equivalent of
this kama (sanctioned desire) as a cause for attaining 'all this' meaning
everything in this creation and continues :

'The manas is self, Speech is his wife, Prana is his child, Eye is human
wealth for he obtains it through the eye, Ear is divine wealth for he hears
of it through the ear, and the body (with all its billions of cells and
devas) is the rite, for he performs rites through the body. (SO) this
sacrifice has five factors - the animals have five factors, the men have
five factors, and all this that exists has five factors. He who knows it as
such attains all this.'

Best regards
bhadraiah

_________________________________________________________________
MSN 8 with e-mail virus protection service: 2 months FREE*
http://join.msn.com/?page=features/virus

