+++
title = "41 Ravisankar S. Mayavaram"
date = "1998-10-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-October/009572.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-October/009572.html)

I agree with shrI Subhanu Saxena on using the original
saMskR^itam.h words instead of translations. It is frustrating
when authors use the terms "soul", "self" etc, very loosely. I
also agree that attempting learn in original saMskR^itam.h is
very fruitful.


Another thing I think about the example quoted by Guy is this.
The word pUrNam.h is more close to full or complete. pUrNatvam.h
is a state of completeness in which there is no lack of anything
and no more want, as there are no desires left unfulfilled.
Translating that into "infinite" or "infinite plenitude", I think
will give only a false sense of intellectual satisfaction.
Complex verses like "pUrNamadaH .." should be learnt and
understood under a good teacher. Reading that on one's own is
worthless.

I remember a quote on quantum mechanics which says that if one
does not get shocked after learning quantum mechanics, (s)he does
not understand it at all.  I think the same applies here. I have
read that when a guru instructs the mahAvAkyam to the disciple
(at appropriate time), he will get realized. These days we see it
written and read everywhere (I hope not on the back of
T-shirts!), with no realization.

Key is acquiring necessary background and learning from a
competent teacher.


With respects,
Ravi

AUM brahmavidyAyai namaH

================================================================
"bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam"
List archives : http://listserv.tamu.edu/archives/advaita-l.html
================================================================

