+++
title = "21 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-10-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-October/025554.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-October/025554.html)

OM shrii gurubhyo namaH

Namaste,

We continue with the series.

51. guNasaMkhyaane kaapile shaastre tadapi guNasaMkhyaanashaastraM
guNabhoktR^ivishhaye pramaaNameva | paramaarthabrahmaikatvavishhaye
yadyapi virudhyate\, tathaapi te hi kaapilaaH
guNaagauNavyaapaaraniruupaNe abhiyuktaaH iti tachchhaastramapi
vaxyamaaNaarthastutyarthatvena upaadiiyate iti na virodhaH || 18.19 ||


##Even that philosophy teaching about the guNaas is certainly valid so
far as it concerns the experiencer of the guNaas, though it is
contradictory so far as the non-duality of the supreme Reality,
Brahman, is concerned. Those followers of Kapila are acknowledged
authorities in the ascertainment of the functions of the guNaas and
their derivatives. Hence, that scripture, too, is being referred to by
way of eulogy of the subject-matter going to be spoken of. Therefore,
there is no contradiction.##



52. eteshhaaM jaativihitaanaaM karmaNaaM samyaganushhThitaanaaM
svargapraaptiH phalaM svabhaavataH || 18.44 ||

##When rightly pursued, the natural result of these duties enjoined
for the castes is the attainment of heaven.##

53. svabhaavaniyataM karma kurvaaNo vishhajaH iva kR^imiH kilbishhaM
na aapnotiiti uktam.h || 18.48 ||


##It has been said that, as in the case of a worm born in poison, a
person does not incur sin while performing his duties which have been
dictated by his own nature;##


54. sahajasya karmaNaH svadharmaakhyasya parityaagena
paradharmaanushhThaane.api doshhaat.h naiva muchyate\; bhayaavahashcha
paradharmaH || 18.48 ||


##One does not get freed from evil by giving up the duty to which one
is born -- called one's own duty -- even though (he may be) fulfilling
somebody else's duty, Another's duty, too, is fraught with fear.##


(To be continued.)
bhava sha~nkara deshika me sharaNaM
Ramakrishna

