+++
title = "112 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-07-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024913.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024913.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna
We have seen in purANa-s, smruti texts, biographies of mahAtma-s  wherein 
jnAni-s like Krishna, rAma, ramaNa, paramahamsa, diti & kashyapa prajapati 
etc. have did what they  are not supposed to do being a brahma jnAni-s 
:-))  So the question is, can jnAni be svecchAchAri or durAchAri without 
any katrutva bhAva and in the name of vyavahAra can he engage himself / 
herself in a shAstra nishiddha act ?? can  shOka, mOha, kAma   wicked 
thoughts influence jnAni's external activities by internally detaching 
from them in a sAkshi bhAva ??  Sofar what is there in these texts  about 
krishna, kashyapa prajapati & his wife diti, ramaNa, rAmakrishna etc. 
suggests that they are all kevala sAkshi-s to this socalled external 
'questionable' activities & it can happen in the vyAvahArik world since 
they (jnAni-s) too have the different dehAntaHkaraNa  & it is possible for 
them to engage themselves in these type of activities without any katrutva 
bhAva & bhOktrutva bhAva, indriyA indriyArteshu vartante, guNa guNeshu 
vartante...So, a jnAni like kashyapa prajapati  can agree with his wife's 
(another jnAni)  untimely demand & satisfied her demand resulting in 
getting rAkshasa saNtAna from the Rishi parampara!! 
But it is better to be noted that shankara is quite categorical in his 
bhAshya that : rAgAgikleshavAsanAkshipta karmApekshA tu avidyA kevalA 
vaishmyakaree syAt...A jnAni cannot be a durAchAri or svecchAchAri  and 
engage himself in shAstra nishiddha AcharaNa  to violate the basics of 
dharma shAstra.  How can he?? asks shankara?? in Kannada we have one 
saying : rAtri kanda bhAviyalli yaarAdaru hagalu beeLuvare??  shankara in 
chAndOgya says us :  na cha pratishiddha sevAprAptiH, ekatva 
pratyayOtpatteH prAgeva pratishiddhatvAt, na hi rAtraU kUpe kaMtake vA 
patitaH uditepi savitari patati tasminneva... 

Further Shankara says in Itareya bhAshya . 

yaThA kAmitvaM tu vidushO atyantaM aprAptaM, atyanta mUdha vishyatvena 
avagamAt, taThA shAstrachOditamapi karma Atma vidO aprAptaM gurubhAratayA 
avagamyate kimuta atyanta aviveka nimittam yathAkAmitvaM, na hi 
unmAdatimiradrushtOpalabdhaM vastu 'tadapagame taThaiva syAt unmAda 
timiradrushti nimittAdeva. 

Here shankara quite clearly says ONLY utter idiots  (atyanta mUdha) would 
engage themselves in nishiddhAcharaNa whereas for Atma vida-s even 
'shAstra vihita karma' itself a big burden!!  No need to mention here, if 
at all we see these type of nishiddhAcharaNa by the jnAni-s  either it has 
some symbolical explanation or it can be 'real' ONLY in ajnAni drushti and 
NOWAY THESE INCIDENTS  CAN BE TAKEN AS THE PROOF TO PROVE JNANI'S KAAMA, 
KRODHA ...
And finally, we cannot make Atma jnAni-s as victims of this 
nishiddhAcharaNa in the name of prArabdha karma, akatrutva & abhOktruva 
cushions & more importantly in  the name of vyavahAra :-))
Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

