+++
title = "54 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2013-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-June/034847.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-June/034847.html)

praNAms 
Hare Krishna


In this case the burden of proof lies on them, not on us.  To deny what
they propose does not require proof by us.  For us anupalabdhi in our 
works
is enough to deny their claims.

>  the upalabdhi in their works is the proof to prove that their 
saMpradAya guru is the guru of shankarAchArya, the upalabdhi of their 
Acharya vAkya is another proof...If we donot believe in their works and 
Acharya, it is only our problem not their :-)) Likewise, if they dont 
believe that parashiva has come and taught yOgAsana to our Acharya since 
for them it is anupalabdhi in their works it is their problem as we have 
pramANa in our works / or in our Acharya's vAkya :-)) is it not??

Also, I have a question on the 'chiranjeevi' status:  Is it not that the
entity is awarded the chiranjeevi status after his current birth? 

>  Yes, as we read in the case of hanumAn, markandeya, bali ashwatthaama 
etc. 

Does this status go back to all his previous births too? I do not think 
so. 

>  not clear, anyway we can say that they have become chiranjeevi-s by 
virtue of their karma in current janma.

Also I recently heard in a discourse that 'chiranjeevi' lasts only till 
this kalpa
and not beyond.

>  Yes, I too read somewhere that this chiranjeevatva lasts till the end 
of kaliyuga..satya yuga may witness a fresh list of chirajeevi-s :-)) 
However, both bAbAji and shankarachArya belongs to kaliyuga only, so there 
is every valid reason for the kriya yOga followers to believe that their 
guruji bAbAji has initiated shankara bhagavatpAda some centuries back. 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!
bhaskar 

PS :  I think we are wasting our energy and time on some irrelevant 
issue...shall we stop ?? 
