+++
title = "274 Kotekal, Srinivas [Non-Employee/0200]"
date = "2003-06-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011624.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011624.html)



praNAm Bhaskar prabhu-ji,

I am trying to understand your views (and Advaita's) and have a couple of
questions regarding your following reply. Any help is appreciated. 

>>Guess what,  KaTopanishat does not say it is only vyAvahAric Truth
>>that  this body dies, not jeeva.  "na hanyatE hanyamAnE sharIrE".

>  but it says from pAramArthika *shAstra drushti*

My first question is; how did you (or anyone) can decide any Shruti
statements (or prastana traya as a whole for that matter) is speaking from
different level than the level in which they are getting perceived by us ?
To begin with all we know is only one level; that is this very worldly level
in which you and I are discussing right now. So also, shAstras are available
to us in this same level. We perceive them in the very same level. Unless it
is explicitly mentioned in the very shAstra about existence of two levels of
satyam (vyavaharika and pAramArthika), how can any one say about them ?
Please explain, how Advaita says so ? 

>  No, prabhuji, if someone ask me to drink poison in vyavahAra, I'll seek
>the guidance from vyavahAric reality & use my vyAvahAric commonsense to
>avoid that criminal.  So, avoiding drinking poison is also in vyavahAra
>only.

Well, in that case, if you are instructed by your Guru to study shAstra to
gain Brahmajnana in this very vyavahAric reality; why do you think by
studying so you will gain pAramArthika jnana ? why can't it such jnana be
also of vyavahAric in nature ? 

Please do not misunderstand my question, but I am just curious why do you
treat two acts (drinking poison vs. studying shAstra ) differently ?  

Regards,
Srinivas.

This communication is intended solely for the use of the addressee and may
contain information that is legally privileged, confidential or exempt from
disclosure.  If you are not the intended recipient, please note that any 
dissemination, distribution, or copying of this communication is strictly 
prohibited.  Anyone who receives this message in error should notify the 
sender immediately and delete it from his or her computer.

