+++
title = "59 Ramesh Krishnamurthy"
date = "2008-05-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020099.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020099.html)

Namaste Praveen-ji,

I do agree with you on the efforts being made to revive the
vedashaala-s. An interesting experiment in this regard is the SIES
vedashala near Mumbai. This is a traditional residential vedashala but
has a tie-up with a nearby CBSE English medium school. The boys attend
the CBSE school in the morning and spend the rest of their time at the
vedashala. A relative of mine mentioned that there is a rush for
admissions here!

But the issue I was referring to is somewhat different, though
overlapping. The traditional acharya-s came through a system wherein
they learned the mantra-shaastra and other forms of sadhana. Sadhana
is the crux of the matter. A person with a regular modern education
who then starts studying Vedanta in his 20s, 30s or later, even if he
takes up sannyasa, just does not have the background in sadhana that
the older acharya-s had.

<<May I also recall here the incident about a gentleman grihasta
visiting the Kanchi paramAchArya and offering to donate to support the
vedAbhyAsa of one student? paramAchArya replied that the gentleman
would just need to send his own child for vedAbhyAsa instead and there
will be no need for a donation!>>

Thanks Praveen-ji for mentioning this. I have come across this before
and it makes eminent sense. At least, I did make a personal commitment
when I first came across this. But finally it is all in mahAkAla's
hands :-)

With best wishes
Ramesh

-- 
santoShaH paramo lAbhaH satsa~NgaH paramA gatiH I
vicAraH paramaM j~nAnaM shamo hi paramaM sukham II

