+++
title = "93 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2007-08-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019251.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019251.html)

Namste Shree Subramanya-Ji:

  Sadananda-Ji has already answered the question and I totally agree with him.

  IMO - The real denigration of Hinduism often occurs at the hands of Hindus.  For example - Using Lord GaNesha, Lord shankara icons for marketing "biiDii", fully knowing the association of  smoking with Cancer.

  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu


>
  >
My hats of to all of them. There is no insult to
Hinduism but they are glorying it by invoking the
presence of the Lord in starting an activity which is
not really a realigious function. 
>
>
>


--- UH SUBRAMANYA 
wrote:

> Dear learned Members,
> Can any one of the List Member clarify the
> following?
> Often most of the Functions whether Government or
> Corporate are inaugurated by lighting of Oil Lamps
> with wicks. The guests light the lamp with their
> shoes on ( They will be in Suit). I think it is not
> right and feel embarrassed to watch such events but
> cannot point out to those doing it to remove their
> foot wear before doing it. The Guests may be
> Ministers or Bureaucrats or some Senior Pundits
> also.
> I would like to remind one scene where Mr. Amitab
> Bachan chanted "Gayathri Mantra" with shoes on and
> this became a big issue, as it was treated as insult
> to our Hinduism. I have also read somewhere that it
> is not right to chant any Vedic Mantra with shoes
> on, let alone shirts on.
> I have seen some Yoga Teachers also making the
> participants chant Gayathri Mantra or other Vedic
> Mantras during some sessions with their shoes on. I
> feel it should be forbidden.
> Hence the Learned can clarify whether the ritual is
> right or to be curbed though this is beyond Advaita
> practice.
> Regards,
> Subramanya UH
> Bangalore
> # 9341323940
> _______________________________________________
> Archives:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> 
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> 
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 



_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




---------------------------------
Sick sense of humor? Visit Yahoo! TV's Comedy with an Edge to see what's on, when. 

