+++
title = "10 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2004-07-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013233.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013233.html)

    shruthi smruthi puRaNanAm Alayam karuNAlayam !
    NamAmi bhagavtpAda shankaram lokashankaram   !!

Pranams,

      Iam thankful to you for giving me an oportunity
to introduce myself to you and through you to the
group.

       Iam Prasad Ramamurhty Kadambi native of
Mysore.Iam 26 years old , and a vishishtadvitin by
birth. we belong to parakala mutt here. Iam a B.E
(mechanical) graduate working for software company
Informedia in mysore.

        I wish to place myself before you with
humility that since childhood i am more attracted to
advaitha and a staunch disciple of His Holiness Sri
Adi shankara.i'm studying the traditional life history
of
my acharya since a decade from now.Offcourse i do not
possess  hi-fi material but should admit studying
"SHANKARA DIGVIJAYA" OF MADHAVA VIDYARANYA rewritten
by SWAMY TAPASYANANDA  of ramakrishna mutt.

        I am a subscriber to tha mailing list of
Kanchi kamakoti peetham and am receiving pages from
hindu dhrama of Sri chandrashekarendra saraswati
swamigal.how much ever i can dedicate to mditate upon
my guru iam doing it sincerely i shold admit.shankara
's philosophy has simply absorbed my self.i always
recollect his yatipanchkam. i have read his
prashnottara ratna malika
and like wise.

        Iam very much intersted to be member of
advita-vedanta miling list and thus these efforts.

My role would be to witness the pristne phylosophical
views of the more knowledgeable and to post my doubts
to the mailing list, i hope i would in turn get the
proper interpretations to my queries regarding
advaitha down the time.

 I REQUST YOU AND THROUGH YOU ALL THE MEMBERS TO
TRAEAT ME AS A STUDENT OF THIS PRISTINE PHYLOSOPHY AND
FORGIVE ME IF I COMMIT ANY MISTAKE.

            JAYA JAYA SHANKARA !

            HARA HARA SHANKARA !!

WITH HUMILITY & REGARDS.


Prasad.K.R
Mysore.


