+++
title = "22 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2019-05-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052079.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052079.html)

>From an FB post:   Karthikheyan Selvaraj
https://www.facebook.com/groups/899012433543219/permalink/1954771407967311/
2 hrs
Rivalry over sitting on Bhagavan's lap:

When Bhagavan was living on the Hill, this incident took place. Bhagavan
loved children and was charmed by their innocence. He admired their lack of
hypocrisy. Vajreswari, the four year old daughter of Kavyakanta Ganapati
Muni, a staunch devotee of Bhagavan and a well known Sanskrit scholar, had
full liberty with Bhagavan and would insist on sitting on His lap, whenever
Vajreswari came. Bhagavan would often call her near Him and show her
affection by putting her on His lap and talking to her.

Once Vajreswari came to the Skandasramam and as usual sat on Bhagavan's
lap. As Bhagavan was holding her and talking to her lovingly, a young
monkey came up to them. The young monkey apparently got jealous of
Vajreswari, pushed her off Bhagavan's lap and took her place.

Vajreswari, started to cry, and she pleaded with Bhagavan: 'Send this
monkey out. I want to sit on Your lap.'

But the young monkey would not give up his privileged place and continued
to sit there. This rivalry amused Bhagavan but at the same time, He wanted
to appease both of them.

He turned to the young monkey and said, 'Look, Vajreswari is your sister.
Is she not? Let her also sit on my lap with you. Give her some room.' Then
He looked at Vajreswari who was standing near Him and said, 'Is he not your
younger brother?
Come on both of you sit on my lap.'

Finally both the child and the monkey sat together on Bhagavan's lap fully
satisfied and enjoyed each other's company. Is this not a practical
demonstration of Bhagavan's love for all beings irrespective of their
forms? It is a lesson to all
devotees!

(Source: Divya Jeevita Makarandam, Tr. from Telugu)

P.C: JJ Jayaraman

regards
subbu
