+++
title = "123 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001258.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001258.html)

Dear members,

I had a discussion with a shishyA of a well-known AchAryA (names
unnecessary) and the topic delved into Advaita and Guru-shishya parampara.
I am NOT asking as if I have stumbled upon a paradox hitherto unknown.  I am
sure some AchArya has answered this convincingly long ago.  Just that I
don't know it.

What is the motivation for a Guru (assuming he is enlightened, attained
"advaita") to continue the parampara ?  A Guru who does not see the shishya
as separate anymore, how can he teach ?  I heard 3 expalanations.  I am not
completely satisfied with it.  I will present them here.  Could anyone
amplify/clarify ?

1.  Even though Guru has attained enlightenment, his body has to undergo the
necessary prarabda karma it has come with like a wheel that will continue
rotating for sometime even after external force has been withdrawn.  But if
you liken enlightenment to waking up from a dream (which many wise men
have), and imagine that a man had taken a loan from another person in the
dream (like prarabda).  If he wakes up, does he have to enter the dream
again to pay the loan (prarabda).  Don't we have various scriptures saying
that knowledge destroys all karmas instantly ?

2.  Another explanation is that the Guru, does it more as Leela (sport) as
opposed to doing it with a motivation.  Like an actor on a stage, who
continues to act, even after he is aware that he is not the character
anymore.  But in that example there is still a feeling of difference ie.,
other characters, audience etc.  So that feeling of difference, might keep
the actor going, in which case, it is not highest of attainments.

3.  The 3rd explanation I heard was that realization only removes
"jnanAdhyasa", but the "arthAdhyasa" can still remain. I just can imagine
how the latter can exist without the former.

If anyone has time, please clarify.

Regards.
S. V. Subrahmanian.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

