+++
title = "02 Kaushik Chevendra"
date = "2020-09-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-September/055405.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-September/055405.html)

Namaste.
A few wonderful words on Vedanta given by a greatest scientist of his era
shrodinger.

*Erwin Schrödinger* wrote:

*This life of yours which you are living is not merely a piece of this
entire existence,but in a certain sense the whole; only this whole is not
so constituted that it can be surveyed in one single glance. This, as we
know, is what the Brahmins express in that sacred, mystic formula which is
yet really so simple and so clear: tat tvam asi, this is you. Or, again, in
such words as “I am in the east and the west, I am above and below, I am
this entire world.”*


*"The insight is not new From the early great Upanishads the recognition
Atman = Brahman (the personal self equals the omnipresent,
all-comprehending eternal self) was in Indian thought considered, far from
being blasphemous, to represent the quintessence of deepest insight into
the happenings of the world. The striving of all the scholars of Vedanta
was, after having learnt to pronounce with their lips, really to assimilate
in their minds this grandest of all thoughts.”*

*‘The unity and continuity of Vedanta are reflected in the unity and
continuity of wave mechanics. In 1925, the world view of physics was a
model of a great machine composed of separable interacting material
particles. During the next few years, Schrodinger and Heisenberg and their
followers created a universe based on super imposed inseparable waves of
probability amplitudes. This new view would be entirely consistent with the
Vedantic concept of All in One"*

*These are quotes from his books.*
