+++
title = "128 Vaidya N. Sundaram"
date = "1998-08-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-August/009258.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-August/009258.html)

 20)
   brahma satyaM jaganmithyetyevaMruupo vinishchayaH .
   so.ayaM nityaanityavastuvivekaH samudaahR^itaH

 The firm understanding that reality is Brahman and that the material
world (jagat) is mithyaa is spoken of as discrimination between the
eternal and the transcient (nityaanityavastuviveka).

 Sri Bhagavatpaada paraphrases nityaanityavastuviveka as the knowledge
that Brahman is satyam and jagat is mithyaa. That is because, even if one
had firm understanding that Brahman is nitya and jagat is anitya, absolute
and uncompromising vairaagya does not arise; for even transient pleasures
are sought. But when the jagat is declared to be mithyaa, an object which
is mithyaa (which has no substantiality) is not desired by anyone. Those
who wish to have a kingdom are not satisfied with a kingdom seen in the
dream. Hence to stabilise vairaagya, instead of saying brahma nityam jagat
anityam, sri Bhagavatpaada says brahma satyam jaganmithyaa.
 viniscayah means visesena niscayah: strong conviction. By the word
niscaya is signified not falling away (from truth) as result of ideas
which are not warranted by (absolute) pramaanas.
 so'yam split into sah and ayam. Sah that which has been referred to as
qualified by viveka; ayam means that this has been spoken of in the
beginning as nitaanityavastuviveka.
 samudhaahrtam (samyak udhaahrtam) i.e. well explained. Only this viveka
will make for vairaagya from enjoyments of the fruits of karmas, here in
the world and elsewhere in heaven.

                      Vaidya N. Sundaram
                    E-Mail: vaidya at purdue.edu
  Home:  #2, 101 Russell St     | School: MGL B309B; ph:49-49367
       West Lafayette,IN 47906  | Purdue University
           (765) 743 4474       | West Lafayette,IN 47907
             http://ecn.purdue.edu/~vaidya

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The place, time, objects and their knower etc., projected in a dream
during sleep are all mithyA (an illusion/false). So too, here. in the
waking state, the world that is seen is a projection by one's own
ignorance. Likewise, this body, the senses, the breath, the ego etc.,
are all unreal. Therefore, That thou art, the peaceful, defectless,
supreme, non-dual Brahman.  -- Adi Shankara in VivekacUdAmani.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

