+++
title = "84 Subrahmanian, Sundararaman V [IT]"
date = "2002-10-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003946.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003946.html)

Thank you for an elaborate reply.  I am writing down thoughts as they came
to me when I read your posting.

1.  There is book called "Maya in Physics" by N. C. Panda and published by
Motilal Banarasidass.  The book is lying in my shelf and I have not had the
chance to read it.  Probably you may benefit by its contents.  Although, by
the time he wrote (1991), I don't know if the theory of quantum computers
had caught up with the academia.  Some of the contents of the book are :
Classical Physics, Particle physics, Relativity, Quantum Physics,
AstroPhysics and finally Advaita Vedanta.

2.  Recently Arsha Vidya Gurukulam had organized a weekend program called
"Vedanta and Quantum Physics".  It was jointly conducted by Swami
Tatvavidaananda and George E. Sudarshan.  The tapes must be availale at
their book store.  You can call the Gurukulam and possibly talk to Swami
Tatvavidaananda, if you need further guidance in this direction.  Their
website is www.arshavidya.org.

3.  Maharshi Mahesh Yogi's institutions have put in a lot of effort at
reconciling Vedic texts with scientific discoveries.  I am not conversant
with their methodology other than the information that they work on such
topics.  You can benefit from them too.

4.  Traditional view point dismisses any need for "validation" of the
content of Vedas outside of Vedas i.e, that the contents of Vedas are
self-validating and no external means can make an authoritative statement
about the validity of the Vedas.  So scientific enquiry can add more means
of explaining Vedanta but is not necessary for "validating" Vedanta.

5.  A fellow student of Vedanta and friend of mine, is quite impressed with
Des Cartes work called the "Discourses on the Method".  He finds that Des
Cartes had worked himself quite close to where the Vedantic texts would lead
one to, by means of his reasoning and the title he has given to his book
namely "Method" is appropriate as his reasoning is more like the various
prakriyas (methodologies) of upanishads.

These are my thoughts.  As and when you progress in your understanding,
kindly share with the list any milestones that you might have crossed.  Good
luck.

Regards,
SVS

