+++
title = "65 Ravishankar Venkatraman"
date = "2004-07-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013289.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013289.html)

It is very difficult to know who is a realized person unless we are realized 
as well.

>From the point of view of Sage Ramana, everything was probably was Brahman 
and there was no difference. At the same time, from the point of view of 
people who visited Him, what He offered to all people was not the same. 
Depending on our vasanas, our perception would be tainted that we cannot see 
the realization in Him. That is the reason, some people get attracted more 
showing more devotion, some people showing just respect with less devotion. 
Some people do not necessarily care about the whole thing and so on...

To some other seekers like Sankaracharya of Puri, Sri. Ramana gave the 
direct experience of the non-dual Brahman. Advanced seekers would be 
benefitted more in the presence of such souls, while others (like me...) 
certainly get at least peace of mind and tranquility.

We have so many gurus these days, and each one of them has their place in 
the upliftment of humanity. As a basic principle, when you are ready for 
such a guru, you will meet that person. In the mean time, we should respect 
all others and see our guru in them. Even if you have a conflict in your 
mind whether you should visit some saint in the neighborhood or not, we 
should resolve it in the light of 'satsangatve nissangatvam...'  Any satsang 
is good.

We must prostrate before other gurus thinking of our own guru. All the seva 
we do, goes to seva towards our own guru.

These are some of the things I have been told and learnt over the period of 
years, by very advanced spiritual seekers.

My 2 cents... I hope that it is helpful to others also.

God bless,
Ravi

_________________________________________________________________
MSN Life Events gives you the tips and tools to handle the turning points in 
your life. http://lifeevents.msn.com


