+++
title = "151 Dr. S.R.Marur"
date = "1999-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-August/010762.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-August/010762.html)

In the posting 'Sankara SampradhAyam - 6', the line posted as,

"The vEdAs and smrithis have classified the vEdic karmas based on the
 maturity of varieties of jivAs and also for the welfare of the world
 and prescribed them as varna-dharma and Ashrama-dharma"

should have been

"The vEdAs and smrithis have classified karmAs based on the
 maturity of varieties of jivAs and also for the welfare of the world
 and prescribed them as varna-dharma and Ashrama-dharma".

The error is regretted.

Regards,

Sudhakar
>From ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG Sun Aug 22 00:53:11 1999
Message-Id: <SUN.22.AUG.1999.005311.0400.ADVAITAL at LISTS.ADVAITAVEDANTA.ORG>
Date: Sun, 22 Aug 1999 00:53:11 -0400
Reply-To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
        <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
        <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
From: "Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at BRAINCELLS.COM>
Subject: Re: Differences between Vedantic schools
In-Reply-To: <Pine.SUN.3.96.990818125358.23851A-100000 at nyx10>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII

Interesting.  So is it fair to say in the Dvaita school Maya is just
Bhagawans power of moha?  Advaitins also have the concept of leela but it
is an "automatic" kind of thing not something controlled by the will of
Bhagawan.

--
Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>

On Wed, 18 Aug 1999, Shrisha Rao wrote:

> On Wed, 18 Aug 1999, Jaldhar H. Vyas wrote:
>
> > Dvaita
>
> > Maya = ignorance in the plain sense of the word with no transcendental
> >        significance.
>
> I don't believe that is accurate, because, for instance, the mANDUka's
> `mAyAmAtram.h' would have to mean "[the world is] by ignorance (in the
> plain sense) only." The actual explanation given is something like `mAyeti
> bhagavatpraj~nA saiva mAna-trANa-kartrI yasya tan.h mAyAmAtram.h', the
> operative part being, of course, `mAyeti bhagavat.h praj~nA' -- mAyA is
> the Consciousness/Will of the Supreme Being.
>
> Regards,
>
> Shrisha Rao
>
> > Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>

