+++
title = "73 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2017-02-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-February/044641.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-February/044641.html)

The Commentary by Sri Lingana  Somayaji in Sanskrit on Panchadashi offers a
resolution of  the apparent contradiction between verses 8 and 48 of
Chapter 13 concerning parinama and vivarta vikara of milk-curd,clay-pot,
gold-ornament transformation through its commentary on verse 49. The same
is reproduced below. Translation is freeflow and not literal, just
highlighting the summary of  the commentary as I understand it. It would be
great if some member provides the literal translation as well for the
benefit of all of us.



Preamble to verse 49



 ननु " अवस्थान्तरतापत्तिरेकस्य परिणामिते " (१३-८ ) त्यत्र
क्षीरमृत्सुवर्णानाम् परिणामिदृष्टान्तत्वमुक्तम्, अत्र तु तेषाम् मध्ये
मृत्सुवर्णयोर्विवर्तदृष्टान्तत्वमुक्तम्, एवम् सति क्षीरस्यापि तथात्वम् किम्
न स्यादित्याशङ्क्याह, क्षीरेति ।



nanu " avasthAntaratApattirekasya pariNAmite " (13-8 ) tyatra
kShIramRRitsuvarNAnAm pariNAmidRRiShTAntatvamuktam, atra tu teShAm madhye
mRRitsuvarNayorvivartadRRiShTAntatvamuktam, evam sati kShIrasyApi tathAtvam
kim na syAdityAsha~NkyAha, kShIreti |



No. In 13-8, it was stated that milk-curd,clay-pot,gold-ornament
transformation is parinama,but here ( verse 48) only clay-pot,gold-ornament
transformation is stated to be vivarta. Why not consider milk-curd
transformation also to be same. If such a doubt were to arise, verse 49
starting with *milk* answers the question.





Commentary on verse 49



 क्षीरादौ विकारनाशे तद्भाववर्जनात् तस्य क्षीरादेर्भावस्य वर्जनात्
परिणामोस्तु । एवम् सति कुम्भकुण्डलावस्थामवाप्तयोर्मृत्सुवर्णयोर्विवर्तत्वम्
नोपपद्यत इत्याश॔क्याह, एतावतेति । एतावता मृदादीना॔ विवर्तस्य दृष्टा॔तत्वम् न
 हीयते । अत्राय॔ भावः । क्षीरस्यावस्थान्तरप्राप्तौ तद्रूपविगलने पुनः पूर्व॔
रूपं न दृश्यते । अतः केवलपरिणामत्वमेव तत्र वक्तव्यम् ।
मृत्सुवर्णयोरवस्था॔तरप्राप्तौ तद्रूपाये पूर्वरूपस्य दर्शनात् विवर्तमपि
वक्तव्यम् ।एव॔ चावस्थान्तरतापत्तिमात्रं परिणामलक्षणम् तत्त्रिष्वपि वर्तते ।
अतो मृत्सुवर्णयोरपि परिणामिदृष्टान्तत्वोक्तिर्नासंगता । विवर्तं
त्ववस्थान्तरविगलनोत्तरकालिकपूर्वरूपवत्वमिति वक्तव्यम् । सा च मृत्सुवर्णयोरेव
न तु क्षीरस्य । एवं च परिणामित्वं व्यापकम् विवर्तत्वं तु व्याप्यमिति ।



kShIrAdau vikAranAshe tadbhAvavarjanAt tasya kShIrAderbhAvasya varjanAt
pariNAmostu | evam sati
kumbhakuNDalAvasthAmavAptayormRRitsuvarNayorvivartatvam nopapadyata
ityAsha॔kyAha,
etAvateti | etAvatA mRRidAdInA॔ vivartasya dRRiShTA॔tatvam na  hIyate |
atrAya॔ bhAvaH | kShIrasyAvasthAntaraprAptau tadrUpavigalane punaH pUrva॔
rUpaM na dRRishyate | ataH kevalapariNAmatvameva tatra vaktavyam |
mRRitsuvarNayoravasthA॔taraprAptau tadrUpAye pUrvarUpasya darshanAt
vivartamapi vaktavyam |eva॔ chAvasthAntaratApattimAtraM pariNAmalakShaNam
tattriShvapi vartate | ato mRRitsuvarNayorapi
pariNAmidRRiShTAntatvoktirnAsaMgatA | vivartaM
tvavasthAntaravigalanottarakAlikapUrvarUpavatvamiti vaktavyam | sA cha
mRRitsuvarNayoreva na tu kShIrasya | evaM cha pariNAmitvaM vyApakam
vivartatvaM tu vyApyamiti I



Summary of the commentary (Not a literal translation)



<< In milk-curd transformation, The material milk also undergoes a
modification apart from the form whereas in clay-pot,gold-ornament
transformation, the material (clay/gold) does not undergo a modification
but only their form undergoes a modification. That is the difference. Hence
while both of them are parinama transformation, in order to distinguish
between these two types of parinama transformation, clay-pot,gold-ornament
transformation are also termed vivarta in addition in a secondary sense..
They (clay-pot, gold-ornament) are parinama transformations in the primary
sense (vyapaka)  and in addition vivarta in a secondary sense (vyapya)  >>.



Regards
