+++
title = "348 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-05-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-May/041435.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-May/041435.html)

It is possible that Sita and Lakshmana may have taken the message that Rama
is safe as a trick of Maricha.

regards,
Sarma.

On Thu, May 26, 2016 at 5:08 PM, KAMESWARARAO MULA via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> Dear Sir,                 Although the questions asked looks like simple &
> funny but I feel that these should be addressed. May be we can take another
> view for the answers. Can'T we expect the avatara of lord vishnu i.e rama
> is well aware that is it really a golden deer exsists? if maya over comes
> at that time, how can it be possible that he will be after hunting a golden
> deer, may be a diving play exsisted. Rama could able to kill ravana with
> sita sakti only so it could be the grace of sita that she should
> deliberately send lakshmana out and get in to the opponents trap so that
> she can make her husband an 'Heroic person'. Although my words are not
> exactly placed, but truth comes  out will be, 'Ramayana' is the divine play
> between a small group of people with lot of hidden secrets. Thanks & regards
> Dr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research &
> Development Establishment, Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road,
> Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0) Imp Note:The information
> contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message
> are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain
> proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the
> intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this
> e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this
> message and any attachments if any.
>
>
>     On Thursday, 26 May 2016 4:55 PM, Venkatesh Murthy (वेङ्कटेशः
> सीतारामार्यपुत्रः) via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> wrote:
>
>
>  Namaste
>
> When I was telling Ramayana story to children one child asked me a
> question and I did not know the answer.
>
> When Maricha was dying from Rama's arrow he shouted 'Oh Seeta Oh
> Lakshmana' and died. But Rama knew he was tricking Him. Why He did not
> shout back 'Oh Seeta Oh Lakshmana. I am safe. Don't worry. Don't be
> fooled by this Rakshasa. I am coming now' ? Why He did not warn Seeta
> and Lakshmana? If He warned them Lakshmana would not come out and
> leave Seeta alone.
>
> One answer is - He wanted to complete the Avatara Mission to kill
> Ravana. But it means He wanted Seeta to get kidnapped. Why? He was
> very powerful He could have killed Ravana immediately. Why He is
> allowing him to kidnap Seeta?  One more answer is He is also deceived
> by Maayaa just like us. Maayaa is so powerful to trick even Gods. Rama
> was shocked and did not know what to do.
>
>
> --
> Regards
>
> -Venkatesh
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
