+++
title = "34 K. Sadananda"
date = "2000-09-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-September/001549.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-September/001549.html)

>Thanks to Sadananda for a great series. Regarding adhyAsa of the
>nonSelf (anAtman) on the Self (Atman), I wish to make one point
>at this time and later write more on it. This point struck
>me as I glanced through the commentary of GovindAnanda and VAchaspati
>(bhAmatI) on the first few sentences of Shankara's bhAShya.

Thanks Anand - It may be a good idea to discuss all these aspects related
to adhyaasa before we enter into the suutra-s.  I propose to take a break
(since I will be on travel anyway during the first two weeks of October)
and would give us enough time to catch up on this very important aspect of
Shankara Bhaashhya.  We will be awaiting for your write-up.

It may be a very good idea if someone traslates the Shankara's original
text - Shree Ravi suggested Saxenaji and we can request him to do so.

>In the case of an illusion such as the snake on rope or silver
>in nacre, the illusion can be explained, analyzed, and shown to be
>possible due to some phenomena, physical/biological processes, etc.
>Even a magician makes use of illusions in his show to impress the
>audience. But then, the magician knows that each illusion that he
>creates can be analyzed, dissected step by step. When analyzed this
>way, the illusion ceases to amaze us. The illusion of the blue sky
>can be explained by scientists using physical processes. In school,
>we learnt how refraction of light causes things to appear bent.
>Many more examples can be given.
>
>Now consider the adhyAsa of the nonSelf and the Self. No such
>explanation can be given! The only thing we can say about this
>adhyAsa is that its cause cannot be analyzed! By analysis, we
>can explain how the illusory thing is a "transformation" of
>something else. But in the case of nonSelf and Self, we cannot
>come up with any transformation that happens to the nonSelf that
>makes it appear as the Self. Shankara says that this adhyAsa
>is mithyA (mithyeti bhavituM yuktam.h).

Very important point.  Hence  Shaastra pramaaNa is the only available
means.  This aspect will be discussed in the next few notes.

Hari OM!
Sadananda



>Anand
>

K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

