+++
title = "132 Hari Kiran"
date = "2020-04-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-April/054280.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-April/054280.html)

Pranaams to All Sages, Scholars and Seekers on this list

I am writing on behalf of Advaita Academy (www.advaita-academy.org) a
platform promoted by Indic Academy (www.indicacademy.org) for disseminating
the wisdom of Vedanta by Sages, Scholars and Seekers from all Sampradayas
and also by teachers who acknowledge the source of their teachings to our
Vedic Scriptures. Over the last 9 years, Advaita Academy has emerged as the
largest video platform dedicated to the dissemination of Advaita, having
more than 10,000 videos from around 50 Gurus, Acharyas and Vidwans.

This year we are celebrating Shankara Jayanthi by way of a month long
‘Global Festival of Oneness 2020' (April 28th -May 27th) (
https://www.indictoday.com/announcements/global-festival-of-oneness-2020/
)  through
a series of online talks and performances. As humanity is currently going
through one of its toughest crisis, now more than ever, Shankara’s
teachings of Oneness are relevant and much needed in these times of
heightened uncertainty and anxiety. Through this month-long festival, we
hope to bring to the world a sense of unity, empowerment and
interdependence between people, nature and the planet as a whole.

Every day till 27th May, we are having two sessions of 90 minutes duration,
one in the morning at 6.00 AM IST and one in the evening at 6.30 PM IST to
suit the convenience of global audiences.

I am writing to request you to speak either *Live *or through a
*recorded *session
on any of Shankara’s works, his life or the relevance of his teachings to
the world today.

If you chose to give a live talk, it can be of 30 - 35 minutes duration
with 10-15 minutes time for Q & A and if your talk is recorded it can be
for 30 minutes or less.

Look forward to your confirmation with potential time slots.

Regards

Hari
