+++
title = "154 C.P.Rajeev Menon"
date = "2006-01-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015677.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015677.html)

Om Paramathmane Namaha

Could you kindly give the meaning for the following

  Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah
            Sarve Santu Niramayaah
            Sarve Bhadrani Pashyantu
            Maa Kaschit Duhkhabhahg Bhavet.





-----Original Message-----
From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
[mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org]On Behalf Of
advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Sent: Monday, January 16, 2006 11:30 PM
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Subject: Advaita-l Digest, Vol 33, Issue 15

Send Advaita-l mailing list submissions to
        advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org

To subscribe or unsubscribe via the World Wide Web, visit
        http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
or, via email, send a message with subject or body 'help' to
        advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org

You can reach the person managing the list at
        advaita-l-owner at lists.advaita-vedanta.org

When replying, please edit your Subject line so it is more specific
than "Re: Contents of Advaita-l digest..."


Today's Topics:

   1. New member introduction: Venkat Shrinivas (Jaldhar H. Vyas)
   2. Re: avadhUta GItA (Aditya Varun Chadha)
   3. Reference check. (v.sh)
   4. The day Adi Shankara embraced sanyas (Prasad Ramamurthy Kadambi)
   5. Re: avadhUta GItA (Ram Garib)
   6. Re: avadhUta GItA (sriram)
   7. kundalini and the chakras. (sriram)
   8. BGB 4.5: dharmAdharmAdi pratibaddhajnAnam. (Murali Karamchedu)


----------------------------------------------------------------------

Message: 1
Date: Sun, 15 Jan 2006 13:29:58 -0500 (EST)
From: "Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at braincells.com>
Subject: [Advaita-l] New member introduction: Venkat Shrinivas
To: Advaita-L <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <Pine.LNX.4.63.0601151328410.15357 at localhost.localdomain>
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed

Hi,



My name is Venkat Shrinivas (Iyer), am 36 years old living in Massachusetts,
USA. I am member of http://www.philosophyfoundation.org/ (a school of
Advaita) where we have weekly classes to study, discuss & practice Vedantic
philosophy.



Venkat Shrinivas

http://philosophyfoundation.blogspot.com/



------------------------------

Message: 2
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 07:59:38 +0530
From: Aditya Varun Chadha <adichad at gmail.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] avadhUta GItA
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
        <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID:
        <9332255f0601151829u1306c7fas21c3f961f8a228e5 at mail.gmail.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1

> 1) God created creation.
> 2) God and creation simultaneously arise.
> 3) There is neither any God nor any creation.
>
> The third step of ajativada is only for realized
> saints and has been upheld by gaudapada. Teachings of
> avadhuta gita are consistent with this last step.

Please explain step 3 above to bring out crisply the difference
between ajAtivAda and buddhism's sUnyatA.

by step 3, is it meant that there is no DIFFERENCE between God and
creation, or that neither exist independantly and there is only one
underlying substrate? to the untrained eye it does seem to be saying
that NOTHING exists, which is sUnyatA (buddhism)

--
Aditya Varun Chadha
adichad AT gmail.com
http://www.adichad.com


------------------------------

Message: 3
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 08:18:29 -0500
From: "v.sh" <v.sh at comcast.net>
Subject: [Advaita-l] Reference check.
To: <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <000501c61a9f$5ad72810$730fa8c0 at PRAGNYA>
Content-Type: text/plain;       charset="us-ascii"

Namaskars.

I am trying to track the original source in Vedas/Upanishads/Bhashyas of the
following prayer for a project we are doing:
            Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah
            Sarve Santu Niramayaah
            Sarve Bhadrani Pashyantu
            Maa Kaschit Duhkhabhahg Bhavet

Could the erudite members of the list help me locate it?

Thanks in advance for your help.

Venkat Shrinivas
http://philosophyfoundation.blogspot.com/





------------------------------

Message: 4
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 20:08:52 +0530
From: Prasad Ramamurthy Kadambi <kaupeenavanta at gmail.com>
Subject: [Advaita-l] The day Adi Shankara embraced sanyas
To: Advaita vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID:
        <3fc81fd0601160638o5d679ef2x9acddb0f4a6bba1e at mail.gmail.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1

Namaste,

<doubt>

Could anyone candidly say what day (According to hindu calendar) did Adi
Shankara embraced sanyas

</doubt>

I need to check with my sources, any early answers? as I saw online that he
took it on Makara SanKramaNa day and I doubt it.

Regards

Prasad Kadambi

--
sada shiva samarambham Shankaracharya madhyamam !

asmadacharya paryantham vande guru paramparam !!


------------------------------

Message: 5
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 15:15:27 +0000 (GMT)
From: Ram Garib <garib_ram at yahoo.co.in>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] avadhUta GItA
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
        <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <20060116151528.97795.qmail at web8609.mail.in.yahoo.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1


--- Aditya Varun Chadha <adichad at gmail.com> wrote:

> > 1) God created creation.
> > 2) God and creation simultaneously arise.
> > 3) There is neither any God nor any creation.
> >
> > The third step of ajativada is only for realized
> > saints and has been upheld by gaudapada. Teachings
> of
> > avadhuta gita are consistent with this last step.
>
> Please explain step 3 above to bring out crisply the
> difference
> between ajAtivAda and buddhism's sUnyatA.
>
> by step 3, is it meant that there is no DIFFERENCE
> between God and
> creation, or that neither exist independantly and
> there is only one
> underlying substrate? to the untrained eye it does
> seem to be saying
> that NOTHING exists, which is sUnyatA (buddhism)

Thanks Aditya for your response. Even for trained eyes
it may seem similar to shunyata!

Gaudapada infact extensively uses maadhyamika's
dialectics in vaitathya and alaatashanti prakaranas.
This should not be surprising. Development of
philosophical thought in India has been a classic
vindication of Hegel's theory of thesis, anti-thesis
and synthesis. Gaudapada came several centuries after
buddha and by this time, there had been so much
interaction and synthesis in buddhist and vedic
thoughts that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish
the two separately.

By the time of gaudapada, only madhyamika school of
buddhism was predominant in India.By his brilliant
karikas, nagarjuna had already demolished the hinayana
schools. Stage was set for gaudapada to
philosophically defeat buddhism just by meeting the
yogacharins on their own turf. His ajativada accepts
most of the madyamika arguments as such and differs
only on the conclusion. Whereas nagarjuna would say
that shunya is neither being, nor non being, nor
neither nor both; gaudapada would assert that that the
ultimate reality is absolute being. Ajativada holds
that there has never been any creation and the brahman
revels in itself without any vikaras.

Hope it makes clear.

Regards
Ram Garib

Send instant messages to your online friends http://in.messenger.yahoo.com


------------------------------

Message: 6
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 21:32:50 +0530
From: sriram <srirudra at md3.vsnl.net.in>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] avadhUta GItA
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
        <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <000201c61aba$ade5de00$5083fea9 at oriion>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1

Dear members
According to Srimad Bhaghavatham there are 24 elements enumerated by
Avadutha as His gurus from whom He learnt lessons which enhanced His
understanding of the world outside leading to jnana.These are
earth,air,sky-akash-water,fire,moon,sun,dove,python,sea,honebee,moth,elephan
t,hunter,deer,fish,awoman named Pingala,a bird called kuraram,a boy,a
lady,mason,snake spider and wasp.Probably lessons are every where and only
it is upto the individual to spot them and make them his own to wisely
transact with the world.
Krishnamoorthy.
----- Original Message -----
From: Dr. Yadu Moharir <ymoharir at yahoo.com>
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Sunday, January 15, 2006 10:39 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] avadhUta GItA


> Namste:
>
>   I do not know thw exact thing what you are looking for  but I am aware
of similar thoughts expressed in bhaagavata puraaNa.
>
>   Atmano gururAtmaiva puruShasya visheShataH
>   yat pratyakShAnumAnAbhyAM shreyo.asAvanuvindate || bhaagavata puraaNa
11.7.20 ||
>
>   Meaning - The "aatmaa" itself is indeed the one's own guide, especially
in the case of man, direct perception and inference he can work out his own
good.
>
>
>   yadu avadhuuta saMvaada | santi me guravo rAjanbahavo buddhyupashritAH |
yato buddhimupAdAya mukto.aTAmIha tA.nshR^iNu || 1107033 ||
>   pR^ithivI vAyurAkAshamApo.agnishchandramA raviH | kapoto.ajagaraH
sindhuH pata~Ngo madhukR^idgajaH ||1107034||
>   madhuhA hariNo mInaH pi~NgalA kuraro.arbhakaH | kumArI sharakR^it sarpa
UrNanAbhiH supeshakR^it ||1107035 ||
>   ete me guravo rAjanchaturviMshatirAshritAH | shikShA
vR^ittibhireteShAmanvashikShamihAtmanaH ||1107035 ||
>
>
>   Meaning - Please listen to the many of my preceptors as selected from my
keen senses acquiring wisdom from whom I wonder in the world as being free.
The Earth, Air, the Moon, and the Sun, the Dove, the boa-constrictor, the
Sea, the Moth, the honey-bee, the Elephant, the Honey-gatherer, the Deer,
the Fish, Pingalaa ( a courtesan), the Osprey, an Infant, the Maiden, the
Forger of arrows, the Serpent, the Spider, and a Bhrnga (a Wasp).
>
>   Ultimately, "The Guru is in You" all you need to do is recognize it and
follow his guidance.  IMO - There is nothing more practical advaitic than
this.
>
>   Hope this helps.
>
>   Best wishes,
>
>   Dr. Yadu
>
>
> Guy Werlings <werlings.guy at wanadoo.fr> wrote:
>   namaste |
>
>
>
> A few days ago, I read somewhere on the Internet:
>
>
>
> "There is a story in the AvadhUta GItA which talks of the AvadhUta who
> stopped at a wayside inn and was asked by the innkeeper, "What is your
> teaching?" He replied, "There is no teacher, no teaching and no one
taught."
> And then he walked away."
>
>
>
>
> ---------------------------------
> Yahoo! Photos
>  Got holiday prints? See all the ways to get quality prints in your hands
ASAP.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




------------------------------

Message: 7
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 21:54:19 +0530
From: sriram <srirudra at md3.vsnl.net.in>
Subject: [Advaita-l] kundalini and the chakras.
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
        <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Message-ID: <000301c61aba$b3fd50c0$5083fea9 at oriion>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1

Dear members
Sri Amuthan Arunkumar wanted to know authentic citations from Sruthy about
the KUNDALINI and the CHAKRAS.He can study Thirumoolar`s Thirumandiram,Sri
Adi Sankara`s Soundharya Lahari and Sri Lalitha Sahasranamam to get at the
correct view of these concepts.They are within the human frame and require
deep dwelling to identify them and realise the bliss when the kundalini
reaches the Sahasraram at the topmost centre of the human brain.The Tamil
poet Avvaiyar also speaks of this in Her Vinayagar Agaval.The whole concept
is related to the controlled breathing of air with one pointed devotion to
raise the kundalini which is spoken of as a serpent which is asleep in 2 and
a 1/2 curls in Mooladhara which is the first chakra which is just above the
genitalia.
Krishnamoorthy.


------------------------------

Message: 8
Date: Mon, 16 Jan 2006 09:42:00 -0800
From: "Murali Karamchedu" <murali_m_k at msn.com>
Subject: [Advaita-l] BGB 4.5: dharmAdharmAdi pratibaddhajnAnam.
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Message-ID: <BAY103-F123F453DDA692F11AD3B50CD1B0 at phx.gbl>
Content-Type: text/plain; format=flowed

Dear List Members,

In BGB 4.5, the acharya explains why is it that Arjuna , and others, do not
remember their numerous births. The reason, he says, is that the jnanaSakti
is constrained by dharma and adharma.

Specifically, he says: 'dharmAdharmAdipratibaddhajnAnaSaktitvAt'.

In the 'dharma adharma Adi', what does the 'Adi' refer to? What else, other
than our actions of dharma and adharma constrain our power of jnana?

Respectfully,
Murali Manohar




------------------------------

_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org


End of Advaita-l Digest, Vol 33, Issue 15
*****************************************


