+++
title = "153 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-02-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-February/000224.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-February/000224.html)

Vivek Anand Ganesan wrote:
>
> Hello all :
>
>     I have been much intrigued by the ardhanArI form.  I am
> only aware of a temple with this mUrthi in Tamil Nadu.
>
> a) Are there temples elsewhere with this form?
>
> b) In general, quite a few of the deities are represented
>    by a male/female couple e.g. ShrI + VishNu, Sita + Ram,
>    Radha + Krishna etc.  Is there a philosophical
>    significance to this?
Yes, it tries to convey that Supreme Being has a Shiva (Prashant)
and a Maya (Chanchala) aspect from our (human minds) limited view point,
but it is a whole. Because our mind can not any way perceive that
totality, our iconographers show it as ardhanArinareshvara and other
similar couples like Vishnu-Laxmi, Sita+Ram, etc.
The idea is somewhat similar to properties of an electron. Sometimes it
looks like a wave and some times as a particle. Both the manifestations
are limited, as we have no way to see electron as it is.(I hope this
does not confuse you!)
>
> c) However, the ArdhanArI form is present only in the
>    Shaivite tradition.  The shaivite tradition also
>    emphasizes the unity of the devotee with Shiva.
>    Is this a later development of Shaivism or was it
>    "monistic" all along?
Other traditions also, in ultimate analysis, the same concept, but
expressed differently. For example Krishna is shown playing Rasa with
Radha. Vishnu bears ShriVatsa Chinha on his breast, etc.
As far unity with devotee is concerned, it seems Shaivites were always
believing in that. Vaishnava (i.e.Bhakti) tradition seems to be
following (right from the time of RiVeda) Dvaita approach.
>
> Thanks,
>
> -Vivek.
> __________________________________________________
> Do You Yahoo!?
> Talk to your friends online with Yahoo! Messenger.
> http://im.yahoo.com
>
> --
> bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
> Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
> Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

Best wishes,
-- Himanshu

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

