+++
title = "71 श्रीमल्ललितालालितः"
date = "2015-07-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-July/038934.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-July/038934.html)

On Sun, Jul 5, 2015 at 3:19 PM, Venkatraghavan S <agnimile at gmail.com> wrote:

> Btw, *you* gave the reference to second parichcheda in advaita siddhi. If
> that is not the correct reference for akhandAkAra, why did you give it in
> the first place?


If you read older posts where I talked about संसर्गासङ्गि.... shloka, and
posts related to that; then you will be able to understand how those two
definitions are related. I've written at least 3 posts about that. If you
are asking now, because only now you faced that problem; then what could I
say other than that please read again, read more.

The problem is that you people are expecting me to say same thing again and
again.
That's not pleasing.

I repeat, I've said everything needed. You just need to go through them and
understand their importance.
This is what happens to us when we study advaita-siddhiH, etc. Mere reading
sentences and getting their apparent meaning, is not enough. We need to
know where to apply which definition/rules, etc. That's happening with you
too. It's scattered. Collect it. Use it. Either from original sources or
our useless writings, it's your choice.

If you remember my posts, then I've mentioned that if you could just get
that there is some different view in shAstra-s, then that's enough for me.
I expect that you will go through proper channel and study yourself, if you
wish to know more and clear.

For Keshav,
I've to say that I've read your posts and they are difficult to understand.
In clear words, they are not close to my understanding. However, the anvaya
of akhaNDa to AkAra and Akara to vRtti is correct, if I must make a remark.
If you read my post in original thread I've given definition of AkAra. That
may help you.



*श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
