+++
title = "29 S Jayanarayanan"
date = "2008-01-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-January/019713.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-January/019713.html)

I have to say that I'm a bit confused that the Sringeri Math is
possibly associated with Swami Parthasarathy in a certain roundabout
manner. Not sure what kind of relationship exists between the two,
and if the following "Swami Dr. Parthasarathi" is the same as the
person referred to in this list, but here's what I found:

---
http://www.sringerisharadapeetham.org/news/sep2007.php

"The Valedictory function was held on Sep 27th. Swami Dr.
Parthasarathi Member of Prime Minister's Advisory Council and the
Chairman of Sri Sringeri Sharada Institute of Management at New Delhi
was the chief guest...The Jagadguru also released a book, "Practice
of Management in the Light of Bhagavad Gita" containing lectures of
Dr. Swami Parthasarathi."
---

I'd be very interested to know if Swami Parthasarathy really does
have the endorsement of the Sringeri Math for his teachings, or if
his book was released by Sringeri for some other reason (such as he
made a large donation to the Math).

If Swami Parthasarathy of www.vedantaworld.org has truly studied
Vedanta (in the strict sense) from a traditional Guru and has the
endorsement of his Guru for propagating his teachings, then I
apologize for doubting the doctrine as being in the spirit of
Vedanta.

Regards,
Kartik


      ____________________________________________________________________________________
Never miss a thing.  Make Yahoo your home page. 
http://www.yahoo.com/r/hs

