+++
title = "192 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2012-09-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-September/033165.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-September/033165.html)

Hari Om! PranaamsM 

The upaniShad name chitti finds a mention as available in Sadhale's collection at Sanskrit documents website. If you write to Sunder Hattangadi (sunderh at hotmail.com) it might be possible to get a copy. 

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya

On Sep 26, 2012, at 4:47 PM, "PNKKrishnadas" <pnk.krishnadas at gmail.com> wrote:

> 
> Thank you, Ramaji.   A nice piece of detective work there.
> 
> Krishnadas.
> 
> **************************************************************
> 
> -----Original Message-----
> From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> [mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org] On Behalf Of
> Balasubramanian Ramakrishnan
> Sent: Wednesday, 26 September 2012 8:45 PM
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Is there a Cityupanisad?
> 
> The reference says it all. The third chapter in the taittiriya
> aaraNyakam is called the cityupanishad, although I have not heard of
> it being referred to by that name.
> 
> The chapter starts citti sruk, cittamaajyam, ..., which may explain
> the name.
> 
> The mantra being referred to is in the anuvaakam which begins suvarNaM
> gharmaM pariveda venam, ... The exact reference is probably sarve
> vedaa yatraikam bhavanti, sa maanasiina aatmaa janaanaam.
> 
> The entire chapter is about the inner meaning of Vedic yajnas.
> 
> No need for any costly photocopying. You can find the saayana
> bhaashyam for the taittiriiya through google.
> 
> Rama
> 
> On Wednesday, September 26, 2012, PNKKrishnadas <p at gmail.com> wrote:
>> As requested, here is the reference in the Taittiriya Upanisad,
>> II.iii.1 (Translation and Commentary by Swami Gambhirananda):
>> 
>> 
>> "....the Vedic text, "Where all the Vedas get united is the Self in 
>> the mind" (Cityupanisad, XI. 1, Tai. A. III. ii, 1) which declares
> the 
>> identity of the Rg-mantras etc., with the eternal Self, can be 
>> reconciled only if the mantras are eternal."
>> 
>> 
>> Thank you.
>> 
>> Krishnadas
>> 
>> *********************************************
>> 
>> -----Original Message-----
>> From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>> [mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org] On Behalf Of 
>> Venkata sriram P
>> Sent: Wednesday, 26 September 2012 6:30 PM
>> To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>> Subject: [Advaita-l] Is there a Cityupanisad?
>> 
>> Namaste Krishnadas Ji,
>> 
>> If you can type the excerpts from the commentary, it would be of 
>> immense help.
>> 
>> I can see only 2 options here:
>> 
>> 1) The word *city* might be a true translation of the word *pura* in
> 
>> sanskrit.  So, it could
>>    have been Tripura Upanishad.
>> 
>> or
>> 
>> 2) It could have been a sandhi of *iti+upaniSad* which is read as 
>> *ityupanishad*.
>>    The word *C* could be either a typo or parenthesis (left
> bracket)
>> 
>> This is my understanding as i havn't gone through the book.
>> 
>> regs,
>> sriram
>> ________________________
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> 
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> 
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> 
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> 
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

