+++
title = "401 Kotekal, Srinivas [Non-Employee/0200]"
date = "2003-06-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011758.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011758.html)



Namaste to all vedAnta bandHu of this list.

After coming from the weekend break, I am very surprised and sad to see how
many members are uncomfortable about my (dvaitin in general) participation
here.

Let me make my position very clear.

I have joined this list to learn Advaita. Why should a Dvaitin learn Advaita
? because I strongly feel that in order to correctly understand the tenets
of any worthwhile doctrine (that too an Vedantic doctrine), it is essential
that one be exposed to conflicting views and be convinced of the truth of
said doctrine.  Since I am in the process of learning Dvaita of Sri Madhva,
I need to get myself exposed to its conflicting views (that is Advaita) and
understand the relative analysis. In this regards, since Advaita is
considered as Vedantic doctrine and as Sri Jaldhar said two doctrines are
based on common foundation, I felt I should understand Advaita. 

As one can see from my postings, I was either asking questions and try to
understand the Advaitic position or correcting misunderstanding of Dvaita's
position to my capacity. And I never malign and throw dirt over Sri
Shankara's teaching as some of my Vedantic bhandus claim here. If I acted as
if they feel so, I am sorry, I was never intended to do so. Infact there
were some personal attack such as labeling me as *nAstika* etc..., but I
don't want to take them seriously as these are inevitable in the vedAntic
pursuit.

Going forward, I would like to make some posts as I still have some things
to be get clarified about Advaita regarding the replies from Sri Jaldhar,
Sadananda, Kartik and Sankarn. Hope I don't upset anyone in the process.

Thanks for your understanding.

Regards,
Srinivas.







This communication is intended solely for the use of the addressee and may
contain information that is legally privileged, confidential or exempt from
disclosure.  If you are not the intended recipient, please note that any 
dissemination, distribution, or copying of this communication is strictly 
prohibited.  Anyone who receives this message in error should notify the 
sender immediately and delete it from his or her computer.

