+++
title = "68 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2019-02-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-February/051536.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-February/051536.html)

Someone brought to my notice an internet article from a Gaudiya follower.
Though  it could just be ignored, I spent a few minutes penning a reply to
him, in part.

regards
subbu

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
Date: Wed, Feb 13, 2019 at 4:03 PM
Subject: An article of Sri Gaurab Saha
To: <vaishnavasevadasa at gmail.com>


https://iskcondesiretree.com/m/blogpost?id=2103886%3ABlogPost%3A1088514&fbclid=IwAR3KvZjI0tqGfG3Er707RMBlJhzZxXmsx9QjbWlBFoSX6bz-d4Lo9zHvCy8

In the above link is an article named 'The Self-Defeating Philosophy of
Mayavada'

by Gourab Saha
<https://iskcondesiretree.com/m/profile?screenName=0irmhoty96kap>

Jan 17, 2012
In the following are shown several inconsistencies and factual errors in
the article: Sentences from the article are shown within // // and
replies/comments given below that:

//The idea of Mayavada has always been present since the decline of the
Vedic age. It is born from the minds of those *jivas* who have been envious
and desired to usurp the position of God.//

When did the Vedic age 'decline'? Is there any history to prove that? The
above claim takes for granted that 'Advaitins are envious and desire to
usurp the position of God.' Where do you get this idea from? Can you show
statements to that effect from Shankaracharya's bhashya/other works?

//The word 'Mayavada' does not appear in any of the authorized Vedic
literatures. This makes it clear that Mayavada did not appear before or
even during the Vedic age. It is a man-made concoction, that manifested in
a post Vedic era//

Does the word Dvaita or Vishishtadvaita or Achintya Bhedaabheda appear in
any authorized Vedic literature? Going by your logic, all these schools are
man-made concoctions, that came up in the post Vedic era.

//Sankaracarya is in fact a manifestation of Siva, who descended to this
world to spread the false philosophy of Mayavada.//

Do all aastika-s who hold Purana-s to be pramana, agree with the above
claim? Does Madhvacharya or Ramanuja agree that Shankara was a
manifestation of Shiva?

//Those of demoniac mindsets had taken to the Vaisnava philosophy and were
causing trouble for the true and faithful Vaisnavas of the Lord.//

Where is the above recorded? Is there evidence for people taking to
'Vaishnava philosophy' and causing trouble to true Vaishnavas? Why would
they do that, once having committed themselves to Vaishnava philosophy
would they even think of causing trouble to Vaishnavas? Also, will people
who are of demoniac mindsets ever take to Vaishnava philosophy? Did
Hiranyakashipu or Ravana do that?

//*svagamaih kalpitais tvam ca janan mad-vimukhan kuru*

* mam ca gopaya yena syat srstir esottarottara*

Make the general public averse to Me by some imaginary hypothesis from you.
Also camouflage me, so that the public will be deluded gradually by desire
for material advancement. (*Padma Purana*)//

If you imply that this plan is to make people take to Advaita, then you
have to prove your thesis. Where does Shankaracharya teach people to desire
for material advancement?

//

Also, in the *Varaha Purana* Lord Visnu instructs Siva saying:


*esa moham srjamy asu yo janan mohayisyati tvam ca rudra maha-baho
moha-sastrani karaya*

O mighty-armed Siva, please write books filled with lies, and thus bewilder
the people.


*atathyani vitathyani darsayasva maha-bhuja prakasam kuru catmanam
aprakasam ca mam kuru*

O mighty-armed one, please preach a collection of lies. Place yourself in
the forefront, and conceal Me.

In this way the Lord ensured that only his true devotees would be able to
recognize the pure path of devotion and those of a demoniac mindset would
be led astray by this false philosophy.//

You say, or quote /Vishnu asked Shiva to place himself (Siva) in the
forefront and conceal Vishnu/ Is this what is being taught in Advaita? Does
Advaita hold Siva to be the supreme to the detriment of Vishnu? Does the
famous Advaitin Srila Sridhara Swamin do this in the Bhagavatam commentary
which Gaudiya-s/Iskcon people hold in high regard?

//The second reason for the Mayavada philosophy was to bring back attention
to the Vedas........Sankara's philosophy guided the people back to the
Vedic way of life.//

At the very beginning of your article you say ////The idea of Mayavada has
always been present since the decline of the Vedic age. It is born from the
minds of those *jivas* who have been envious and desired to usurp the
position of God.//

But now you say Shankara's philosophy guided people back to the Vedic way
of life!! Does the Vedic way of life result in jivas becoming envious of
God and desiring to usurp the position of God? Does Veda teach that?

If I get a response from you for the above observations, I shall point out
your wrong understanding about the 'philosophy' part.

Om Tat Sat
