+++
title = "27 bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com"
date = "2005-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-September/015006.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-September/015006.html)


South India has always been the bastion of Vedic rituals.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

We, here in South India (Bangalore) do recite aruNa prashna
(taitirIyAraNyaka prathama prashnaH) along with mahAsoUra sUktaM (rigvEda
sUktaM), atharvaNi sUryOpanishad, Aditya hrudaya & trucha kalpa during
sUrya namaskAra vidhi. (even I'have seen this recitation procedure  in
Mattur).  Sofar I've not heard about this *filtering* of maNtra bhAga from
AraNyaka portion of vEdA bhAga because of some vidhi vAkya-s in it.  During
sUrya namaskAra after the end of each anuvAka we say * gruNi sUrya
AdityAyanamaH namaskAraM samarpayAmi* For that matter, even in agnaukaraNa,
agnipunassandhAnaM, puNyAha vAchana & kalashArAdhana,  etc. in maNtra bhAga
itself lot of vidhi vAkya-s are there ( for exp. dvE dvE darbhAni
nikshipya, apa upa spurShya, AjyaM nidhAya, Ajya pAtre udakaM nikshipya,
kalaSham gaNdhAkshatha patra pushpAni abhyarchya, kalaShOdakEna pUjA
dravyANi prokshya, shEsha jalaM visrujya etc. etc.) but we do recite those
*vidhi vAkya-s* as if these are part & parcel of main maNtra bhAga..but
while reciting we do parallelly necessary *kriya-s* as well. I dont think
on these occassions we do only kriya without *telling* the same in maNtra
rUpa (maNtra purassara/maNtra pUrvaka). I think,  this is just like
reciting phala shruti, gIta shlOka,  etc. etc. as part of vishNu
sahasranAma.

Just my few thoughts....

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



