+++
title = "210 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-08-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028617.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028617.html)

For more information one can refer to व्याकरण शास्त्र का इतिहास written by
युथिष्ठिर मीमांसक and published by रामलालकपूर ट्रस्ट.

regards,
Sarma.

2011/8/13 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <dvnsarma at gmail.com>

> The vyAkaraNAs in vedic times were called प्रातिशाख्या's.
>
> regards,
> Sarma.
>
>
>
> On Fri, Aug 12, 2011 at 10:09 PM, Sunil Bhattacharjya <
> sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com> wrote:
>
>> Thank you Siva Senaniji. Yes Vyakarana is one of the six Vedangas. Do you
>> think that during the Vedic times there might have been one or more original
>> Vyakaranas, which were not extant during the later times of Panini and that
>> prompted him to fill up the gap? There is no doubt that Panini did that job
>> brilliantly.
>>
>>
>> Regards,
>>
>> Sunil K. Bhattacharjya
>>
>>
>>
>>
>> ________________________________
>> From: Siva Senani Nori <sivasenani at yahoo.com>
>> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <
>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>> Sent: Friday, August 12, 2011 4:26 AM
>> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Gayatri mantra
>>
>> Sri Sunil Bhattacharya wrote:
>>
>> But the million dollar question is did Panini make any retrospective
>> corrections in the Vedic texts to fall in line with his Vyakarana. In my
>> opinion the Vedic Sanskrit was beyond the scope of panini, though Panini
>> derived help from that it formulating his grammar. Now my worry is whether
>> we should or should not apply Panini's grammar very strictly for
>> interpreting the Gayatri mantra. I shall be grateful if the learned and
>> experienced  Sanskrit scholars in the forum throw light on this aspect.
>>
>> ------- My reply ------------
>>
>> Panini's vyakarana is a vedanga. It is an anga because it helps to protect
>> and understand Veda better and to apply that knowledge. For those who seek a
>> pramaana for the above statement, please see the PaspaSaahnikam in the
>> Vyaakaranamahaabhaashya written by Patanjali. It starts with the sentence
>> "atha SabdaanuSaasanam", followed by the question (after discussing 'atha'):
>> keshaam Sabdaanaam? The answer is given: "laukikanaam vaidikanaam ca".
>>
>> Panini cannot make any changes in Vedas retrospectively, and he did not.
>> What is the pramaana? One's teacher and the Vedas themselves. Vedas abound
>> in non-Paninian usages. They are expalined by the praatiSaakhyas. Both
>> grammar and praatiSaakhyas apply to Vedas, which explains why we meet with
>> some un-Paninian usages in Vedas.
>>
>> To know the meaning of a word, we need Niruktam in addition to
>> vyaakaranam. Gayatri mantra has been interpreted by many great people using
>> those two and we do not need to do it afresh.
>>
>> Regards
>> N. Siva Senani
>> _______________________________________________
>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>
>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>
>> For assistance, contact:
>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>> _______________________________________________
>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>>
>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>
>> For assistance, contact:
>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>
>
>

