+++
title = "00 Ravi Mayavaram"
date = "1998-04-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-April/008352.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-April/008352.html)

<original post deleted>

namaskAram


I thought I should write this to the list and discuss it openly.
I received the request from shrI Vishwanathan Krishnamoorthy, quite
sometime back. In fact I wanted to deny the request.   After
discussing this issue with Govind, I decided to go ahead and add.


Personally I think, advaita-L is not a test bed for untested ideas of
new age philosophers. It is to discuss advaita-vedanta.  These days
many form notions like those posted in the introduction, after reading
inexpensive paperbacks on Modern Physics. Many of them are not even
physicists. Whether Universe sprung from a singularity or not, are
debatable from Modern Physics view point itself. It is positively
disgusting to discuss eternal vedantic ideas in terms of ephemeral
modern science. And the audacity of concluding what saints and sages
thought after reading a english translation of bhagavad gita is
amazing to me.

As a member of the list, I can hit the D key on many such posts, which
I do often. But as maintainer, I cannot remain silent. This is list is
for advaita-vedanta.  This forum is not for discussing Buddhism, and
definitely not for discussing new-age philosophies.  Personally I
remain silent like many others because, I do not want to write
something non-vedantic and pollute the forum. Like others, I learn
from many who write so well on the issues of Advaitam like
Vidyasankar, Anand, Sadananda, Jaladhar Vyas and few others.  I am
grateful to them.

I request that this forum need not be used for discussing one's pet
theories and be used only to discuss advaita vedanta as taught by
Shankara and his disciples. Personally I would prefer silence to a
daring display of ignorance. Of course, where you draw the line is
upto you.

with respects,
Ravi
parandhAma rUpAm bhajE pANDya bAlAm

