+++
title = "39 Ramesh Badisa"
date = "2004-05-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-May/013095.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-May/013095.html)

Dear respected members,
Namaste.

>This is where I am drawing a distinction. No one has used the term 
>sadyomukti in the above manner.

Badisa: The 16 parts of witness will merge in divine on reaching him 
(divine) (Prasna Up. 6.5). Before merging, these parts still maintain 
individual identities. Right? They will loose their individual identities 
when they merge in divine. This is called absolute salvation. In jeevan 
mukta state, this won't happen upon his divine realization while living. 
Why? Because, the divine realized soul still resides in the physical body of 
jeevan mukta. At that point also, this soul is separate from divine. So this 
state cannot be called an absolute salvation. That is the reason, sri 
Shankara says that "The pranas (organs) and elements of the knower of the 
Nirguna brahman get merged in It (divine) at death" in Brahma Sutra 
commentary (4.2.15). Thus, in case of jeevan mukta (a gyani), these parts 
merge in divine only after his death. This is called the absolute salvation, 
and advaitam, as there are no two, but one only present in absolute sense.

Now let us extrapolate this situation to liberated souls at Brahma Lok. Even 
though these souls at Brahma Lok are said be liberated, but they will 
achieve the absolute salvation only at pralaya. All 16 parts are still 
associated with such souls before pralaya. Even though, after Lord Brahma's 
final liberation teaching they experience that 'they' are nothing but 
'divine', but such situation cannot be called absolute salvation. Because, 
these souls, along with 16 parts haven't yet merged in divine. Experience of 
divine on the part of liberated souls after Lord Brahma's teaching is only 
called realization of their true identity of divinity. On the other hand, if 
this condition is absolue salvation, then there is no need for these souls 
to merge in divine at pralaya.

>
>It is not just a question of annihilating prArabdha karma. For both the 
>sadyomukta and the jIvanmukta

Badisa: I haven't come across such a term 'sadyo mukta' in spiritual texts. 
I will be grateful to you if you can provide me some reference. I know 
sadhyo mukti, as per sruti. By saying jeevan mukta and sadyomukta 
separately, it implies that there can be different muktas in the world. I 
understood that a jeevan mukta, after death, attains divine immediately, 
meaning that his soul won't go any where, but becomes every thing 
immediately to become divine. In order to differenciate this situation from 
the the soul of a krama mukti path,where it goes through various regions and 
stays at Brahma Lok, the method of attaining of divine by a jeevan mukta is 
said to be sadhyo mukti. At that highest level, the terms sadhyo mukti, 
vedeha mukti are synonymous, and are concerned only with the soul. This may 
also remind us the synonymous words for krama mukti path, like devyan marg, 
path of light, archiradhi marg etc.

>videhamukti, the instant of physical death of a jIvanmukta should not be 
>generally called sadyomukti, because there can still be the step of the 
>individual self going to brahmaloka, through the devayAna, depending on 
>what kind of upAsana the said jIvanmukta did during his or her lifetime.

Badisa: A saguna worshipper or a nirguna worshipper can become a jeevan 
mukta. Once they attained to that level, then there is no more difference 
whether this state (jeevan mukta) is achieved by saguna or nirguna worship. 
In both cases, after the death of physical body, the soul will merge in 
divine for absolute salvation, where there is no limitation of any kind.

A person who worshipped divine in saguna form, depending upon the intensity 
of devotion for divine, he can achieve realization that he is the divine in 
the very same life. For example, bhakta Prahalad. Initially, he worshipped 
divine in the form of Lord Vistnu. Thus, Lord Vishtnu assures him that he 
will get atma gyan in due course of time in the very life itself. In that 
case (after getting atma gyan or divine experience that 'he' is 'him',), his 
soul will get salvation immediately, meaning that the worshipper of saguna 
brahma's soul will not go to brahma lok or any where after death.

However, if this sadhaka during his spiritual sadhana is able to make his 
karma to zero but fails divine realization due to sudden death, then in that 
case, his soul will go to brahma lok. The main reason for going to Brahma 
Lok is to get divine realization. Without this, these souls cannot get 
salvation. Therefore, it is rightly said that knowledge pays way for 
salvation. What is this knowledge? We all know that it is certainly not the 
bookish knowledge, but it is the knowledge of divine experience by intense 
spiritual sadhana. Sri Rama Krishna paramahamsa is another example in this 
regard. He worshipped divine in the form of Kali. In the later stages, he 
also got divine realization by which he understood that 'he' is 'him'. 
Please see the incidence of sri Rama Krishna paramahamsa with sri Thotapuri. 
The conclusion is that after divine realization, the soul of jeevan mukta of 
either modes of worship will not go to brahma lok, but gets salvation 
immediately after physical death.

Namaste
Badisa
>
>_________________________________________________________________
>FREE pop-up blocking with the new MSN Toolbar Â– get it now! 
>http://toolbar.msn.click-url.com/go/onm00200415ave/direct/01/
>
>_______________________________________________
>want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
>http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>Need assistance? Contact:
>listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

_________________________________________________________________
Stop worrying about overloading your inbox - get MSN Hotmail Extra Storage! 
http://join.msn.click-url.com/go/onm00200362ave/direct/01/


