+++
title = "153 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2016-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042514.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042514.html)





----- Forwarded Message -----
 From: Dr. Yadu Moharir <ymoharir at yahoo.com>
 To: Srirudra <srirudra at gmail.com>; V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>; A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>; A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> 
 Sent: Friday, September 9, 2016 9:01 AM
 Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Vinayaka(s)

Looks like the vaaman puraaNa quotation did not appear from my PDF file.
नायकेन विना देवि तव भूतोऽपि पुत्रकः ।
यस्माज्जातस्ततो नाम्ना भविष्यति विनायकः ॥ वा.पु. २८. ७१-७२ ॥ 


      From: Dr. Yadu Moharir via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
 To: Srirudra <srirudra at gmail.com>; V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>; A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>; A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> 
 Sent: Friday, September 9, 2016 8:49 AM
 Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Vinayaka(s)

Namaste
Before we discard GaNesha and/or vinayaka we need to negotiate and understand the derivation of term vinaayaka. In the first place GaNesha is ayonijaka.
GaNesha is vinaayaka as per vaaman puraaNa

In 2011, I wrote a book (GaNesha 360 : The Science of Smart Living) on the this very subject of vinaayaka and their significance to our lives in all aspects, personal, spiritual, social as well as national levels. I had given several talk in US, Canada and India. Our Moderator Dr. Vidyashankar had attend my talk in New Jersey.

Please contact me, if any one is really understanding this vighnakartaa Model as suggested by Sage Vyasa, first they will need to read my book. Interestingly, this concept is utilized by the western world, especially NASA, The FDA, Pharma Industry, Computer Industry. Only folks who are not using it are the Indians who remain attached the rituals without understand the associated utility (viniyoga).
Best regards
Dr Yadu







