+++
title = "48 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2020-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-January/053806.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-January/053806.html)

Source: Sri Abhinava Vidhya Theertha Vijayam (Tamil). Compiled by K. V.
Subburathinam

Once, when Jagadguru Sri Sacchidananda Shivabhinava Nrusimha Bharati
Swamiji was on a Vijay Yatra in South, a poor Brahmin who lived on alms
alone (Unjavruthi) had come for the darshan of His Holiness. While waiting
for Acharyal’s darshan he observed other devotees inviting His Holiness to
their residences for Pada Puja and Bhikshavandanam. Wanting to invite His
Holiness to his humble abode, he enquired about the possibility of the
same. However, on knowing that he should deposit a certain amount in
advance and take permission from the Mutt’s administration, he dropped the
idea as he didn’t have the necessary funds.

Still, the desire to invite Acharyal to his house was lingering in his
mind. One day, while receiving Theertha Prasadam, he said, “I would be
greatly blessed if Your Holiness could come to my house and have bhiksha.
Will that happen?” Acharyal said, “It shall happen with Ambal’s anughraham.”

The Mutt’s administrator, Srikanta Sastryji, was very particular about the
Mutt’s policy. He categorically informed the poor Brahmin that until the
specific amount is deposited in advance, Acharyal's house visit will not be
possible.

Two days passed by and suddenly around 9 a.m., Acharyal called the Mutt’s
palanquin carriers and asked them to carry Him to the poor Brahmin’s house.
The poor Brahmin was pleasantly shocked to see Acharyal in front of his
house. He immediately prostrated and welcomed His Holiness into his tiny
house. His house consisted of only one room, which he used for cooking,
living, sleeping etc.

When Srikanta Sastryji came to know about His Holiness’s unplanned house
visit, he rushed to the Brahmin’s house. Seeing the pathetic state of the
house, he was both annoyed and baffled.

His Holiness said, “Srikanta, I will do today’s Ambal Puja here only.”
Sastryji enquired, “Where will Your Holiness bathe and were will Your
Holiness do Your anushtanam?”

His Holiness calmly replied, “Bring the Mutt’s screens and use them to
create a partition in the corner. I will bathe and do My anushtanam there
itself.” Following Acharyal’s instruction Sastryji tied the screens in such
a way that His Holiness took His bath and did His anushtanam.

Another worry gripped Sastryji. “How I am going to arrange for Maha
Neivedyam?” he wondered. He immediately made arrangements to bring vessels
and provisions for Maha Neivedyam. “Now who will cook the Prasadam?”
pondered Sastryji.

Seeing this, His Holiness said, “Srikanta, you have told me earlier that
you can cook well. Cook the Maha Neivedyam for today’s Puja here itself.”
Likewise, Sastryji cooked the Prasadam. His Holiness performed the Puja and
had His Bhiksha. The poor Brahmin pulled out all the coins from
his Unjavruthi pot and submitted them as Pada Kannikai. His Holiness
gracefully accepted it, but gave it back to the Brahmin. He then sat on the
palanquin and returned to the camp.

Sri Gurubhyoh Namaha
