+++
title = "66 UH SUBRAMANYA"
date = "2007-07-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019107.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019107.html)

Respected Members,
Lot of heat is being generated by discussions on Vairagya. For the honorable 
members, I suggest to study the book "Vairagya Shataka"  ( 100 verses on 
Vairagya) by King Bhirtruhari, the English translation is available with 
Ramakrishna Mission. The Book is worth reading.
For kind information of Members I am already a member of Advaita lists, but 
I used to receive through gmail.
Regards,
Subramanya UH
Consultant, Yokogawa, Bangalore.
# 9341323940
----- Original Message ----- 
From: "Kalyan N" <nkshemalatha at gmail.com>
To: <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Sent: Thursday, July 26, 2007 12:59 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Advaita-l Digest, Vol 51, Issue 14


> Dear All Members
>
> Hari Om
>
> *On Vairgya*
>
> Vairagya without Viveka is difficult to hold on. Viveka comes out of
> knowledge of the reality. When you hold on to something by giving up
> something is not vairagya. The fact that King Ashoka did not fight
> again clearly shows that he followed one of the values of "Ahimsa" and he
> found satisfaction in following Buddhism. We should follow an exit 
> strategy
> of 4 Ds. Discrimination, Dispassion, Discipline and Desire as mentioned in
> the Sadhana Chatushtayam as very well explained by Swami Paramarthananda 
> in
> his lecture - Tatvabhoda. If you discard something or give up something
> without a complete understanding of why, there is every possibility of
> holding on to something lower than that we gave up. We should hold on to
> higher ideals like Ashoka of holding on to Ahimsa will take us further in
> the path of knowledge & remove the bondages which will be the real 
> vairagya.
>
> Hari Om
>
> In His Seva
>
> Kalyan
>
>
>
>
>
>
> On 7/25/07, advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org <
> advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>
>> Send Advaita-l mailing list submissions to
>>        advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>>
>> To subscribe or unsubscribe via the World Wide Web, visit
>>        http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>> or, via email, send a message with subject or body 'help' to
>>        advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>>
>> You can reach the person managing the list at
>>        advaita-l-owner at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>>
>> When replying, please edit your Subject line so it is more specific
>> than "Re: Contents of Advaita-l digest..."
>>
>>
>> Today's Topics:
>>
>>   1. New member introduction: C.N.S. Adishesha (Jaldhar H. Vyas)
>>   2. Re: Vadakkunatha (Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian)
>>   3. Re: Is vairAgya/renunciation  a result of glumness??
>>      (srirudra at vsnl.com)
>>
>>
>> ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>>
>> Message: 1
>> Date: Tue, 24 Jul 2007 17:39:08 -0400 (EDT)
>> From: "Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>> Subject: [Advaita-l] New member introduction: C.N.S. Adishesha
>> To: Advaita-L <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>> Message-ID: <Pine.LNX.4.64.0707241737470.21500 at jaldhar-laptop>
>> Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
>>
>> I am 48 years old and presently working as manager in
>> Canara Bank in India.
>>
>> About 25 years back I developed interest in vedanta ,
>> more particularly in advaita school as my family
>> traditionally belong to this school.
>>
>> As my job is transferable, I could not get initiated
>> into formal study of philosophy as traditional people
>> do in India. However I could able to get all the
>> original works of Adishankara and on my own I am
>> studying them. I am more interested in studying works
>> on Upanishads, rather than Brahmasutras. I am not much
>> interested in reading post Shankara advaita works
>> except a few, namely the works of Sureshwara, known as
>> direct disciple of Adishankara and works of Sri
>> Sattchidanandendra Saraswathi.
>>
>> I would like to join this group as this appears to be
>> helpful to me in enriching my knowledge.
>>
>>
>>
>> ------------------------------
>>
>> Message: 2
>> Date: Tue, 24 Jul 2007 18:25:41 -0700
>> From: "Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian" <rama.balasubramanian at gmail.com>
>> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Vadakkunatha
>> To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
>>        <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>> Message-ID:
>>        <d6ea147d0707241825y4941f435xa2f9ebf522491313 at mail.gmail.com>
>> Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1; format=flowed
>>
>> >From my Tamil Grammar knowledge, I was inclined to say vaDakkunAthan.
>> The vaDakku +  nAthan. The 'n' doesn't duplicate. On the other hand I
>> believe it is vaDakkutthisai (Northern direction), the 't' duplicates.
>> When I saw the reply by Ramesh, I was a little puzzled. I asked my
>> wife, who is from Kerala, and she confirmed that it should be
>> vaDakkunAthan. But she wasn't able to give the syntactical rule for
>> it. I'll ask my father-in-law who is pretty good at Malayalam Grammar
>> and confirm it.
>>
>> Rama
>>
>> On 7/22/07, Guy Werlings <werlings.guy at wanadoo.fr> wrote:
>> > All my deepest thanks to shrii Ramesh Krishnamurthy.
>> > PraNAm-s
>> > Dji-dobolyu
>> > ----- Original Message -----
>> > From: "Ramesh Krishnamurthy" <rkmurthy at gmail.com>
>> > To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
>> > <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>> > Sent: Sunday, July 22, 2007 6:29 PM
>> > Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Vadakkunatha
>> >
>> >
>> > > It's "vaDakunnAthan", literally "lord of the north"
>> > >
>> > > Ramesh (not a Malayali though)
>> >
>> >
>>
>>
>> ------------------------------
>>
>> Message: 3
>> Date: Wed, 25 Jul 2007 03:01:58 +0000 (GMT)
>> From: srirudra at vsnl.com
>> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Is vairAgya/renunciation  a result of
>>        glumness??
>> To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>> Message-ID: <e4c0d983602dd.46a6bd26 at vsnl.com>
>> Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
>>
>> Dear Members
>> Yes it is true that a shock results in deep thought about what exactly is
>> life.But soon we forget and carry on with our routines.King Ashoka comes
>> to
>> my mind when he vowed that he will not indulge in another war after the
>> Kalinga war in which he was victorious.His vairagya came after a success
>> and
>> he embraced Budhdhism.My point is one should be truly
>> get affected eitherby a sad event or a happy one  and set out to seek
>> remedy
>> IMMEDIATELY.All life stories of
>> great people only indicates this aspect.They never waited for an 
>> opportune
>> moment to get vairagya.It was spontaneous.
>> R.Krishnamoorthy.
>> ----- Original Message -----
>> From: <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
>> To: <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>; <advaitin at yahoogroups.com>
>> Sent: Friday, July 20, 2007 11:44 AM
>> Subject: [Advaita-l] Is vairAgya/renunciation a result of glumness??
>>
>>
>> >
>> > praNAms
>> > Hare Krishna
>> >
>> > Yesterday I was discussing with one of my friends casually, the topic
>> was
>> > about vairAgya.  He said that vairAgya or dispassion is always a result
>> of
>> > some grief in one's life.  He took the examples of buddha, dhruva,
>> ramaNa
>> > maharshi & argued, see buddha had to see the miseries of life, dhruva
>> had
>> > to suffer from his step mother & ramaNa had to undergo that strange
>> > experience of death to get vairAgya....If everything is going fine in
>> > one's
>> > life, he/she never even think about vairAgya despite he/she is very
>> > philosophical & spiritual in his/her normal approach towards life.   My
>> > friend continued to argue, though most of us  know the importance & 
>> > talk
>> > hours together about  dispassion & renunciation etc.  we never try to
>> put
>> > them into practice coz. we donot want to come out of our comfort zone.
>> I
>> > thought in a way, he is right!!! Because, I've not seen/heard any
>> incident
>> > where one, who was leading a comfortable & secured  life took saNyAsa 
>> > by
>> > mere discrimination (vivEka) without any untoward incidents..Either
>> there
>> > must be a severe catastrophe in his/her life or there must be a
>> > traditional
>> > obligation (thouse who belong to & studied under the guidance of
>> orthodox
>> > saNyAsa Ashrama/ mutt) to force them to adopt themselves to saNyAsi way
>> of
>> > life or to the path of vairAgya.
>> >
>> > I know this is only limited vision of vairAya...I'd be highly obliged 
>> > if
>> > prabhuji-s share any additional thoughts on this subject.  If those
>> > thoughts make me to think about  the path of vairAgya
>> seriously,  nothing
>> > like that!!
>> >
>> > Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
>> > bhaskar
>> >
>> >
>> > _______________________________________________
>> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>> >
>> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>> >
>> > For assistance, contact:
>> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>> >
>>
>>
>>
>> ------------------------------
>>
>> _______________________________________________
>> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>>
>> To unsubscribe or change your options:
>> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>>
>> For assistance, contact:
>> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>>
>>
>> End of Advaita-l Digest, Vol 51, Issue 14
>> *****************************************
>>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org 


