+++
title = "36 sanskrit_beginner at unlimitedmail.org"
date = "2004-08-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013365.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013365.html)

Namo namah:
 I just saw the moderator send my intro to the list. I thought
I would send my pranam's to all members - namo namah: 

 Just so everyone understands my background, I am a skeptic
right now, and while I am willing to learn and perhaps be
proved wrong, I wish to not just accept everything that is
said. I would like to question authority if that's acceptable.

 I also have a few questions, as I get started and oriented on
the pursuit of understanding the higher elements that I am told
governs us and all creation.

The first question is related to karma: Karma as I understand
it is nothing more than a set of steps in a process, like the
steps in a manufacturing process. One can pay any amount of
attention to detail, but like in the manufacturing world, there
comes a point when any additional effort to make the process or
product perfect does not result in corresponding return on
investment. There is a tapering off ... I have a gut feel Karma
is also like that. If it is, what is that point when we can
start saying that upto this point, the return on investment in
terms of attachment to detail will make sense, beyond this
point  upto the next point, one can approximate, and beyond
that, one can safely ignore? If this line is not understood,
then I fear we lose focus.

The second question is related to meditation: is meditation
different from nitya karma where one does japa? if it is
different from gayathri japa, why so? if it is not different,
then what type of meditation does it fall under (actually, I
don't know for sure what the different types of meditation are
either - just heard and read a few names)

The third question is bhakti: Can two peoples' bhakti be
compared, measured, and contrasted as better/worse etc.

I will wait for someone to respond before I ask other questions. 

dhanyavaadah:
sanskrit beginner


--------------------------------------
Message sent from the
Unlimited Mail Free Services Platform.
http://www.unlimitedmail.net
--------------------------------------



