+++
title = "02 VP Nandakumar"
date = "1997-05-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006307.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006307.html)

I just love the stone and the river and all the things we see and from which we
can learn. I can love a store or a tree or a piece of bark. These are things and
one can love things. But one cannot love words. Therefore teachings are of no
use to me; they have no hardness, no softness, no colours, no smell or taste -
they have nothing but words. Perhaps, that's what prevents you from finding
peace, perhaps there are too many words, for even salvation and virtue. Samsara
and Nirvana are only words. Nirvana is not a thing; there's only the word
Nirvana.

It may be a thought, but I confess, that I don't differentiate between thought
and words. I do not attatch great importance to thought either. I attatch more
importance to things.For example, there was a man at this ferry who was my
predecessor and teacher. He was a holy man who for many years believed in the
river and nothing else. He noticed that the river's voice spoke to him. He
learned from it and it educated and taught him. The river seemed like God to him
and for many years he did not know that every wind, every cloud, every bird and
beetle is equally divine and knows and teach just as well as the esteemed river.
But when this holy man went off into the woods he knew everything, without
teachers, without books, just because he believed in the river.

If the "thing" is an illusion, I'm also an illusion and so they're of the same
nature as myself, and what makes them so lovable and venerable. That is why I
can love them. Love is the most important thing in the world. It may be
important to great thinkers to examine the world, to explain and despise it. But
I think it's only important to love the world and not to despise it, not for us
to hate each other, but to regard the world and ourselves and all beings with
love, admiration and respect.

THE ABOVE PASSAGE AND THE TWO ARTICLES BEFORE IT ARE EXCERPTS FROM NOBEL PRIZE
WINNER HERMANN HESSE'S SIDDHARTA, WHICH IS ABOUT A YOUNG INDIAN'S QUEST FOR SELF
REALISATION.

