+++
title = "91 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2011-04-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/026996.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/026996.html)



> 
> Shankaracharya has carefully stated what to take as stuti when the context
> is that.  The Jnani's satya-sankalpatva is also explicitly stated by
> Shankara in that Mundaka Bhashya.  Even in the Kathopanishat (1.1.24)
> bhashya, while the mantra did not say that, Shankara adds in the bhashya:
> सत्यसंकल्पः हि अहम् देवः as Yama's words when assuring a lot of things to
> Nachiketas.  Shankara thinks that Yama senses that Nachiketas might have
> doubts about Yama really materializing these things for him and therefore
> wants a word of reassurance from Yama Himself.  Surely this is not a eulogy
> .  This mantra is another example for the Jnani's ability to create /
> provide objects of desires for 'another' person to enjoy/experience.
> Nowhere does Shankara say that these are stuti-s.
> 

Hari Om Shri Subrahmanianji, Pranaams!

Instead of appreciating the vairAgya of the disciple which is the prakrta viShaya of this section of upaniShad, you are taking it to mean jnAni's ability to create.....

jnAni or deva or yama or Ishvara cannot make a vairAgI yield to the tactics. 

Had the intention of the shruti is to prove the capacity of jnAni in yama to create for himself/others, the story would have proceeded in the style of naciketA returning with goodies created by yama.

Nor that AcAryaji brought in words of yama while the mantra does not say that-- 'aham devaH satya-sa~NkalpaH' which was in the context of upaniShad using words 'yati manyase' which gives scope of a doubt wanting a reassurance. 

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya



