+++
title = "106 श्रीमल्ललितालालितः"
date = "2015-06-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-June/038688.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2015-June/038688.html)

*श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com

On Fri, Jun 19, 2015 at 11:41 AM, Ravi Kiran <ravikiranm108 at gmail.com>
wrote:

>
>
> On Fri, Jun 19, 2015 at 10:36 AM, श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
> lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:
>
>>
>> On Fri, Jun 19, 2015 at 8:21 AM, Ravi Kiran <ravikiranm108 at gmail.com>
>> wrote:
>>
>>> Ok, used in the sense, knowledge arises when vastu is perceived..
>>>
>>>
>>
>> How could you justify this?
>> By differentiating meaning of knowledge and perception? Is it possible?
>>
>>
>> Yes, can we say, if seeing a vastu is perception and knowing the vastu
> subsequently is the knowledge
>

And, what do you mean by 'seeing' apart from it's knowledge generated by
eyes?
You are just changing words without considering sameness of their meanings.



> ... though all happens instantaneously and cannot be differentiated
> likewise when perception takes place, unless one analyzes the cognition
> process with the help of the vedAnta books/works.
>

Not like that.
We don't differentiate like you said.
We don't accept two perceptions or knowledges.
The best you can do is to replace 'seeing' as 

'contact of eyes with pot'.
But, then it will not fit the original sentence you used. You used 'GYAna
give knowledge'. That just reveals lack of viveka of meanings of those two
words. I know that GYAna = knowledge, is that correct!!?? But, you were
using as if they were different.

We maintain that,
*If you can't propound it clearly, then you don't have proper knowledge of
subject. You may have ApAta-pratipatti(partial knowledge) which need to be
polished by questioning your belief.*
And, please mind that *Every word you say is important. You should be able
to tell the sense in which you used the word in a particular sentence. If
you can't, then either you don't know correct meaning of the word/ or your
whole concept(conveyed by the sentence) is wrong.*



>
> Thanks
>
>
>
>
>
>>
>> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>>
>
>
