+++
title = "158 Kiran B R"
date = "2002-08-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003478.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003478.html)

Dear Friends,

Many thanks for the responses to my question.

As Sri Jagannath wills, I will first spend a few words
on why I came to Advaita at all. It was basically
because of the analytical manner in which Swami
Vivekananda has explained the Universe in his book
Jnana Yoga. Advaita is really my first brush with
religion, and my knowledge of it is really in its
infancy.

Now to the answers to my question:

This is from the answer of Sri Aniruddhan:
---
Once the nirguna brahman, the Ultimate, is reached,
why would a jnani, who has cast off all attachments to
this world and in fact sees it as unreal, want to use
his powers? The jnani definitely would have attained
all powers to be attained (except creation of the
universe).
---

Why would he want to use? Because I want him to use.
Because I want to know what he is. Because I want to
know what his jnana is. From Sri Aniruddhan's answer,
the following question arises:

If Ishvara is a different "view" of the nirguNa
braHman, and if the Universe is Ishvara's maayaa (of
which Kiran filled with avidyA is part), what is it
that prevents the braHmavid, who is nothing but the
nirguNa braHman, from asking Ishvara to change some
trivial rules of Physics for the sake of Kiran?

The answer of Sri Jagannath mostly cautions a mumukShu
that he should not be lured by trivial Raja Yogic
powers. Fine. But that does not answer my question.
Can the braHmavid beat the laws of Physics? Can he
control Maayaa? Can he run 100m in 2s? Yes or no?

My views (perhaps supported/not supported by the
Shruthis) on this issue:

In the Mahabharata we hear of magic-like acts
performed by Bhagavan Sri Krishna. I would call that
as throwing to the dustbin the laws that run this
world, viz., the laws of Physics. I believe that
Krishna, if he wills, can change this entire maayaa.
If he wills, tomorrow water will turn into ice on
heating. If he cannot, what is the point in calling
him as Bhagavan? I wouldn't call him who has to bow
down to the laws of Physics (maayaa) as Bhagavan. It
is He who controls the laws of Physics who is
Bhagavan.

And I believe that advaita says that it is Him that
the braHmavid "becomes". If a long-distance runner's
avidyA is completely removed, he "becomes" Bhagavan
Krishna. This is my belief. Is it wrong? Please let me
know.

According to me, a braHmavid has no incapabilities. If
he has not the capability of controlling maayaa,
Advaita becomes mostly a way of removing oneself from
this maayaa whereas people sitting next to one are not
helped in any way.

We all have incapabilities in this maayaa which we
live in. One thing is to get out of this maayaa,
attain the "param" (braHmavidaapnOti param) and become
one with the nirguNa braHman and never return to "do"
any "karma" in this world. But of what use is the
braHmavidyA and of what use is the braHmavid to this
maayaalOka if Bhagavan Krishna does not keep his word
of "sambhavAmi yugE yugE"? If the coming of Bhagavan
Krishna is an event which cannot be influenced in any
way by the braHmavid, I see that as an incapability in
the braHmavid...which is not good!

If I who now have innumerable incapabilities in this
maayaa "become" the braHmavid, I want to come back to
this maayaalOka on my own accord as The One without
any incapabilities. That is, as Bhagavan Krishna. And
if I cannot, braHmavidyA is not as useful as I thought
it would be.

Dhanyavaad
Kiran


__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
HotJobs - Search Thousands of New Jobs
http://www.hotjobs.com

