+++
title = "252 Srikrishna Ghadiyaram"
date = "2002-08-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003606.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-August/003606.html)

Hari Om !!

--- Kiran B R <kiranbr at ROCKETMAIL.COM> wrote:

>
> I believe that Swami Vivekananda is a 100% Advaitin.

It is very surprising. I came across a few Vivekananda
admirers (through his books and introduction to him by
his name and fame in the world).  But, surprisingly, I
find them dogmatic. None of us have seen the 'caste
repressions of the earlier times. But, many admire
Vivekananda based on what has been the social
condition then, and follow his Advaitic thought based
on the ideas of that time. Many seem to stick to his
teachings just they way it was meant in the quote (as
a complaint) -

"The Lord has shown me that religion is not in fault,
but it is the Pharisees and Sadducees in Hinduism,
hypocrites, who invent all sorts of engines of tyranny
in the shape of doctrines of Paramarthika and
Vyavaharika. (V.15)."

They have formed their own doctrines.

I just referred the dictionary. In the above sentence
Pharisees and Sadducees have meaning which are
opposte.

If  the (opposite) meanings are correct (and used
together), then the above quote is meaningless

or

the swami meant that both Pharisees and Sadducees
have doctrines and both groups have caused tyranny;

This means that if the 'spirit of religion' is lost
then  the doctrines of both Pharisees and Sadducees
mean 'tyranny'.

This is meant for one who thinks that 'religion is at
fault'. But, who on this list thinks that 'religion is
at fault' ???? (knowing its true import)

Om Namo Narayanaya !!

Srikrishna


__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
Yahoo! Finance - Get real-time stock quotes
http://finance.yahoo.com

