+++
title = "66 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2003-11-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-November/012382.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-November/012382.html)


---- Forwarded message from Sri MN Namboodiriji follows -------------

Dear Ravi

Om Maatre namah


Regarding your post in the Advaita list on ‘vairochaniim’:

As I had mentioned in an earlier email to you a few days ago (sent to
miinalochani), Durga suktam is contained in Mahanarayana upanishad
(also known as Yajniki Upanishad).


This upanishad is the last prasna or prapathaka in Taittiriya Aranyaka
(belonging to the Krsna Yajurveda). The RK Math publication on this has
commentary by Sw. Vimalananda who gives a brief explanation of each
mantra in sanskrit. These sanskrit commentaries are not apparently
direct quotations from earlier masters, but he says that he that he has
consulted the commentaries on Taittiriya aranyaka by SaayaNa and
Bhattabhaaskara.


I reproduce below the commentary for the second mantra in Durga suktam.
I have not signed up on this elist, so I am sending this to you. If
this is useful, please do post it:


taamagnivarNaa.n tapasaa jvalantii.n vairochanii.n karmaphaleshhu
jushhTaam.h .
durgaa.n deviim sharaNamahaM prapadye sutarasi tarase namaH .. 2..

commentary:

jyotiruupaam tapassaamarthyena diipyamaanaam vividharochanasya arthaat
naanaaruupeNa aavirbhavatah devasya svabhuutaam paraprakrtiruupaam
karmasu tatphaleshu cha saamarthyaadhaayakatveNa sthitaam taam durgaam
deviim aham sharaNam prapadye | he sutarasi tarasvini taraNakushale
tvameva asmaan samsaaragartaat sushhTu taarayasi | tasyai tubhyam namah
astu |


vairochaniim – belonging to him who shines variously through
manifestations


I take refuge in Her, the Goddess Durga, who is fiery in lustre andd
radiant with ardency, who is the power belonging to the Supreme who
manifests Himself manifoldly, who is the Power residing in actions and
their fruits rendering them efficacious (or the Power that is
supplicated to by devotees for the fruition of their work). O Godess
skilled in saving, Thou takest us across difficulties excellently well.
Our salutations to Thee!



Regards.

MN Namboodiri



