+++
title = "182 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2008-05-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020204.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020204.html)

The brahmins who only recite without understanding have been compared to donkeys carrying the weight of sandalwood

  yathaa kharaa ca.ndana-bhaara-waahii bhaarasya vettaa na tu saurabhasya
tathaa hi vipraH shruti-shaastra-puuraaNaH\, dnyaanena hiinaH pashubhiH samaanaH|  uttara giitaa ||

  I firmly believe that all the knowledge documented in our vedic literature has a practical application, we just have not realized it.  Thus through manana, chintana and nedhidhyasana we need to cleanse ourselves to determine it's practical utility for our own benefit.  Just saying that this is aadhyaatmika and we should not even try to understand or superimpose it in vyahahaara is our ignorance.

  That is why Acharys emphasized the importance of self validated knowledge "caantaHsiddhaa svaanubhuutiH pramaaNam"

  All Advatins often give the example of "ghaTa" and "mR^ittikaa" to highlight the ultimate truth, but fail to address - what should "ghaTa" do after the realization that his form was only transient?  OR Should the ghaTa take moxa through self-destruction or should he use the current form of ghaTa and become useful for the purpose it got created?

  It is important to recall ashTaavakra where he says " moxakaamasa moxaadeva bibhishikaa" - One is afraid of things that actually gives the moxa.  as rightly said in mahabhaarata " aatmaarthe pR^ithvim tyajeta"

  Just some additional thoughts $0.02

  Kind regards,

  Dr. Yadu

  "subramanya.uh" <subramanya.uh at in.yokogawa.com> wrote:
  Dr Yadu Moharir rightly commented in his posting that " Above story also
confirms that just academic knowledge has little value. Reciting rudra has
no value if one does not understand it or use it for their own benefit."

This is applicable in case of all recitals. Many Ritwiks in the Temples
chant Rudram, Chamakam, Mahanarayana, TaittarIya, Udaka shanthi, Maha Soura,
AruNa with many Suktas, but never knows the meanings also. Without proper
training or knowledge of Samskrit grammar, they even spell wrongly or split
the sentences improperly. To recite and understand the meanings of these,
knowledge of basic Samskrit grammar is essential, though not the other
Vedangas like Shiksha, Chandas, Nirukta, Jyothi Shastra and Kalpa. They are
not interested in knowing meanings also. They chant these mantras with a
blind faith that some thing good will accrue to their wealth of PuNya or it
leads to Moksha.
Similar is the case with many Shlokas and Stotras. There is no use singing
them without Bhava. Bhava comes only if the words are understood.
Sri Shankaracharya reiterates at many places in Viveka Chudamani like " Na
snanena, Danena, PraNayama shatena cha"; "Yajantu Devan,Bhajantu DevataaH";
" "Vagvaikahri... sa tu Bhuktaye na tu Muktaye" etc.
These are just my few feelings. The learned on this list can elucidate on
this.
Subrahmanya UH

_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




