+++
title = "30 D.V.N.Sarma"
date = "2003-07-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011900.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011900.html)

According to the Mahabharata Arjuna did forget what he has been 
taught by Krishna and hence asks him to repeat it. Krishna says
that when he taught Gita he did it in higher state of consciousness 
(say trance) he cannot repeat it now. Then he teaches Arjuna, 
Uttara Gita.

regards,
Sarma.

On 3 Jul 2003, at 14:02, bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com wrote:

> 
> praNAm prabhujis
> Hare Krishna
> 
> I have a serious (you may call it mischievous) doubt here. My question is,
> in gIta,  even after krishna's valiant effort to enlighten arjuna through
> 17 chapters (krishna's upadEsha starts from II chapter) & from 650 & odd
> shlokas (leave sanjaya uvAcha, arjuna uvAcha etc.), arjuna again deluded by
> the influence of kAla & dEsha & succumbed to ahankAra mamakAra when he
> fought with babruvAhana (arjuna-chitrAngada's son) & tAmradhvaja &
> hamsadhvaja during ashvamEdha digvijaya yAtra (post kurukshEtra era).  Is
> all krishna's efforts in vain??  looks like naughty question, but we have
> to think it over seriously is it not??  There is no guarantee that we will
> attain permanent jnAna even it is received from vEda puruSha?? What are
> your thoughts on this prabhujis??
> 
> I know I may get the replies like *first think about yourself* then you
> analyse  whether arjuna was a jnAni or not, etc.  But I am very specific
> here to get the meaningful answer.  Kindly help me.
> 
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
> bhaskar
> 
> 
> _______________________________________________
> want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> Need assistance? Contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 


