+++
title = "122 Min"
date = "2003-08-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-August/012128.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-August/012128.html)

Namaste Vidyasankar,

It seems to me that the shortcut transliteration
is unnecessary if your objective is for a
universal reach. If you are only trying to
communicate with people who need the shortcut
transliteration scheme, then it is an entirely
different matter. For English-non-Sanskrit readers
like myself, it is more daunting to run into the
these odd forms, especially if you are trying to
explain about advaita vedaNta in a FAQ. Presumably
those who can make good use of the shortcut
transliteration scheme would not need a FAQ of
advaita vedaNta, n'est-ce pas?

Min

Also, so many Sanskrit words, as on my 2nd list
[without immediate explanation relief] is doubly
daunthing.

Again, it depends on your audience and your
"mission."

-----Original Message-----
From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
[mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.or
g]On Behalf Of Vidyasankar Sundaresan
Sent: Saturday, August 30, 2003 6:46 PM
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Subject: [Advaita-l] Transliteration


>MaNduKyA, would that be a different word? As a
>person who has the misfortune of not knowing
>Sanskrit, my guess of course is that the capital
>letters are where they are for a reason. I
haven't
>figured it out or I missed something somewhere.

Dear Min,

Yes, the capitals are used for a specific purpose,
as a shortcut
transliteration scheme, to avoid complicated
transliteration marks like
macron, underdot etc. Please see
www.advaita-vedanta.org/avhp/ and go to the
link called Transliteration at the top. There is
an explanation of the
symbols there. I will add a pronunciation key to
that page soon. Feel free
to ask if anything on that page is unclear.

Best regards,
Vidyasankar

__________________________________________________
_______________
Get MSN 8 and enjoy automatic e-mail virus
protection.
http://join.msn.com/?page=features/virus

_______________________________________________
want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/
advaita-l
Need assistance? Contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

