+++
title = "311 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-06-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-June/027803.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-June/027803.html)

Namaste Srikanta:


It appears that yo have not read my post correctly. I never said "Adi shankara didnot start the mutts to proliferate the cults like Shaiva,Vaisnava etc" as you seem to have ubderstoiid. What I has said is reproduced below:

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>
.Acharya Shankara became sanyaasi by giving up his personal family, 
but did he not create even a bigger family by establishing various maTha
 in call corners of India.. With introduction of pa~Ncaayatana puujaa he
 tred to unite various groups and cults ( saiva, vaiShNava, gaaNapatya, 
devi uapaasaka ....etc). 
<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<


His introduction of pa~nacaayatan puujaa and de-personalization of deities 
(humanistic icons) was a brilliant effor to unite various 
cults/practices by isoclated groups within the society. Is this not 
practicing."advaya" of various factions within the divided society?

I wonder if excessive fascination with the concept of "Individual moksha" might have resulted in citizens becoming more selfish. Like everyone whats "ghee" on their chapati only. What needs 
to be practiced is "samaajika moksha" for the betterment of the common 
good of the society when it come to hygiene & corruption This is 
where present maThadhipati" seeds to step-in and educate the masses. 
They seem to be only interested in gracing various occasions and "paadya puujaa". I have not seen any efforts from these aacharyaa's to teach 
practicing "UNITY". Do all the acharya's of various maTha have a united front of any of the issues, even interpretation of various scriptures? 
Some of the inner circles tell me that they do not want to come together with others (other maThadhipatii's) for the fear unnecessary 
confrontation with each other. May be I heard it or understood it wrong 
but I do not see and efforts from all to come together and resolve any 
pending issues?


>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>
we not seen enough of 'inhumanism"by Modern science?The atom 
bomb.weapons,and the cell phone which has fallen into the hands of 
Terrorists to terrorize people and kill them,which otherwise would 
become a boon?The bullying of smaller countries by US?
<<<<<<<<<<<<<<

Cell phones in India become a 2-G (scam / corruption) issues.
How one uses the nuclear power is what one needs to consider. Science did not create nuclear power, it just discovered the principles. Nuclear fusion and fission is constantly happen in nature (Sun Flairs can be a good example). How one wants to utilize for a larger good of the society needs to be evaluated objectively and then implemented. If this is not done then GaNesha visits in the form of (pratyaksha) Vighnakarta. but if used approproiately, then only GaNesha can be experienced (pratyaksha).


Anyone who has power will always use it or use it to threaten it, whether that individual entity is a person or an individual Nation. It only the powerful, self-reliant folks who survive. Is that not the reason why paaNii-vaada was idisueeed in our ancient literature?


Rather than trying to understand the scholars spend their time and efforts on "Dates of mahaabhaarata" or janma-patrikaa for "Rama and kR^iShNaa" under the banner of "jotiShya vij~naana". On one had everyone insists of the most accurate time of the birth but do we know the correct birth dates, or time of their birth. IMO - This is a total waste of their time and intelligence. All I can do is not participate in such futile discussions.

So, please do not go on blaming Science for your woes. Rather than blaming, recognize and move on.

IMO - When every individual feels that his/her ideals are only the "TRUE" really results in chaos. This appears to be th case with terrorists as you mentioned. Finding new application for existing instruments is "prayoga" and I do not see anything wrong with this. Thieves and newly wed couples worship GaNesha but both of them have different objectives. One is trying to scheme for a successful theft (using existing knowledge or a successful getaway); where as, the married couple is looking for blessings for having a trouble long married life. Both can be successful if the use the knowledge at their disposal.


Best regards,

Dr. Yadu



________________________________
From: Srikanta Narayanaswami <srikanta.narayanaswami at yahoo.com>
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Sent: Monday, June 27, 2011 11:20 PM
Subject: [Advaita-l] Nodern science and Vedanta

Please elaborate of what do you mean by "Inhumanism". I have no clue what you are talking about.

Anyone who ignores "pratyaksha" deserves to suffer. If you tell me that India is not suffering then please do gloat on Vedanta.
_______________________________________________________________________________-Have we not seen enough of 'inhumanism"by Modern science?The atom bomb.weapons,and the cell phone which has fallen into the hands of Terrorists to terrorize people and kill them,which otherwise would become a boon?The bullying of smaller countries by US?
Adi shankara didnot start the mutts to proliferate the cults like Shaiva,Vaisnava etc as you have said.India is not suffering for not seeing the 'Pratyaksha"as you have said,but by ignoring the "Dharma"for which it stood for in the ancient times.
N.Srikanta.

_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
