+++
title = "40 Bhaskar YR via Advaita-l"
date = "2014-05-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-May/037021.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-May/037021.html)

Section I. Playing with another man's wife is adharma.

  Section II. Krishna played around with other men's wives.

  Section III. Krishna is established in dharma.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

IMHO, finally  it all boils down to 'shraddha' that we have  in the words 
of krishna and our unconditional acceptance that the personality called 
krishna which appeared in bhAgavata / bhArata  is bhagavAn, yOgeshwara 
himself  and since he showed some supernatural miracles, whatever he did 
(rAsa leela with gopi-s ) and said (like divya geetOpadesha )  is with 
divine intention and some of his seemingly questionable activities do not 
do any harm to his divinity/purity.  No need to mention that for the 
'outsiders' who simply see krishna as a historical character would argue 
these issues in an another way.  Same is the case with us also when there 
is a 'name' change in  section - II & III :-))  Do we accept any present 
day pavAda/avatAra purusha / swamijy if they caught in Section-II despite 
having the large number of followers and oral clarifications / 
justifications for their quesitonable activities from their mutts and 
followers ??  One of the recent popular swamiji openly declared in the 
court of law that he is neither man nor woman and he is dehAteeta to 
justify his illegal relationship with his lady disciple :-)) His followers 
accepted this clarification unconditionally because this Acharya for them 
is a miracle man and they claim that he helped them to arouse their 
'kundalini shakti to sahasrAra within no time :-)) 

Just sharing my thoughts, no offence is intended to anyone.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
