+++
title = "33 Chelluri Nageswar Rao"
date = "1997-02-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-February/005959.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-February/005959.html)

                                        SRIMATRENAMAH

NAMASKARAMS:

THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR RESPONSE.  LIKE YOU ADVISED I WROTE TO SRI
SHANKARACHARYAS OF SRI SHARADA PEETAM AND KAMAKOTI PEETHAM AND SEVERAL OTHER
LEARNED SWAMI'S.  I  WILL SHARE THEIR RESPONSES WITH ALL OF YOU TO PROVIDE
GUIDANCE IN YOUR SEARCH FOR THE TRUTH.  HERE IS ONE RECEIVED FROM SRI SWAMI
JYOTIRMAYANANDA.   HE ALWAYS PROVIDES PROMPT RESPONSES.

" The two steps you have mentioned is like flower & fruit.  As a flower
matures a fruit begins to develop.  Do not think of sharp transition between
the two.  Continue your sadhana with faith, patience &perseverance.  The
flower of your aspiration will bring forth the fruit of enlightenment.  As
you succeed by degrees in your meditation you enjoy more &more of the
Presence of God.  With the awareness of Divine Presence even adverse
circumastances turn into prosperity.   May God bless you".

I forgot to mention in my posting "Fear of Samadhi" couple of important
things.

1. I am not a serious meditator and I dont know how to meditate.  brought
several books on meditation including Vivekananda to learn meditation.
 Mantra japa goes on (god knows since how long) involuntarily when I am awake
and in sleep.  I do sandhyavandanam and regular puja to Devi.

2. I am very fond of performing homams - It gives me so much happiness,
nothing in this world compares with joy the of performing homam.   Like I
mentioned in my previous postings I am performing Chandi Homam in Ashtadasa
Peetalu.  This year I am going to Ujjaini in November to perform the 12th of
18 homam in Sri Mahakali Temple.   On Sriramnavami April 16th I am going to
perform Rudra Homam in Draksharamam in Andhra pradesh where I performed the
2nd Chandi Homam.

I believe and have complete faith in what Devi said in Saptasati, that is the
guiding force for me.

"Janata Ajanata vapi, balipujam thada krutam
pratikshishya myaham preetya, vahnihomam thada krutam"

I lovingly accept your puja & homam whether you perform rightly or wrongly
(knowingly or unknowingly).  Knowing that she accepts I am performing with
 love and sincerity.

I believe my acts are responsible for the happenings.

Regards                                                            Nageswar

