+++
title = "200 Sudhanshu Shekhar"
date = "2019-05-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052260.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052260.html)

Hari Om,

It is a well-known rule that if there is a prima facie contradiction
between Shruti and pratyaksha, then it is to be inferred that Shruti
intends to say something else.

In this connection, I was struggling with the intended meaning of Brihad
Aranyak Shruti 1.5.23. It states that sun goes to VAyu in evening during
sunset. In Adhyatma, the chakShu (counterpart of sun) goes to PrAna
(counterpart of VAyu).

The topic is for upAsanA of PrAna.

However, the merger of chakShu in PrAna is an empirical fact whereas merger
of sun in VAyu is not an objective fact. Nothing happens to sun in evening.
It remains where it is and where it was. Sunrise and sunset are said with
respect to earth and are to be understood in a secondary sense.

How to resolve this contradiction?

If we were to say that it is an adhidaivata sun which is talked about, then
is it true that Surya merges with Vayu devata in *evening *and during *sunset?
*This should not be so for He is available for other people of same earth.

If it is neither physical sun which merges in VAyu nor Surya devatA, then
how exactly should we understand the reference of merger of sun in vAyu in
evening during sunset.

If we were to hold that the statement can make sense for the purposes of
upAsana, then my question is whether we can do the upAsana with a factually
wrong statement. Will we get requisite shraddhA. The upAsanA should also be
logical. For e.g. in Brahma Sutra BhAShya, BhagvAn BhAShyakAra says that
there is nothing illogical in worshipping omnipresent at a particular
localized place but the vice versa cannot be proper.  अत्रोच्यते — नायंदोषः
न तावत्परिच्छिन्नदेशस्य सर्वगतत्वव्यपदेशःकथमप्युपपद्यते सर्वगतस्य तु
सर्वदेशेषुविद्यमानत्वात्परिच्छिन्नदेशव्यपदेशोऽपि कयाचिदपेक्षया सम्भवति.
(1.2.7)

Thus, it appears that upAsanA cannot be recommended by way of factually
wrong statement. It can be, however, recommended through statements having
figurative usage.

In this regard, please share your views on 1.5.23.

Regards,
Sudhanshu.

-- 
Joint Commissioner of Income-tax,
Pune

sudhanshushekhar.wordpress.com
