+++
title = "25 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2018-11-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050911.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050911.html)

Free Download of the illustrated life and teachings of Jagadguru Sri
Abhinava Vidyatheertha Mahaswamiji

This illustrated story book, conceived of and published to benefit people
of all age groups, narrates snippets from the enthralling story of an
extraordinary sage of the 20th century, Jagadguru Sri Abhinava
Vidyatheertha Mahaswamiji, the 35th Jagadguru Shankaracharya (1954-1989) of
the Sringeri Sharada Peetham.

An easy and interesting read, the 32-page comic-styled book is packed with
telling events from the Acharyaâ€™s life. It contains excerpts from His
interesting and ever-relevant teachings that are easy to comprehend for
child and adult alike. The true-to-life illustrations in comic style, bring
to life the many events described.

A unique sage of the modern world, His Holiness Jagadguru Sri Abhinava
Vidyatirtha Mahaswamiji led an extraordinary life. The book is packed with
incidents from his life about the lofty values he held dear, his
fascinating spiritual journey, the tremendous power of His grace, his
down-to-earth nature, his ever-cheerful disposition, his capacity for
friendliness with all manners of people, his multifaceted abilities, his
extensive travels and teachings, his enormous compassion for all beings,
His love of nature, and many more.

The book is available in four languages: English, Kannada, Tamil and Hindi.

The printed book in all its four avatars was released on October 18, 2017
(the birth centenary of the Mahaswamiji) by Jagadguru Sri Bharati Tirtha
Mahasannidhanam. The books have sold more than 45,000 copies.

All four books are now available as e-books for free download, to mark the
101st Jayanthi of the sage that falls on Deepavali day, 2018.

Download the book for free here: www.abhinavavidyatheertha.org

(Announcement at the Sringeri Math website: http:/www.sringeri.net/)

regards
subbu
