+++
title = "69 Sriram Krishnamurthy"
date = "2011-02-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-February/026487.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-February/026487.html)

Namaste,
20 Important Spiritual Instructions for Sadhakas as per Swami Sivananda.
 *TWENTY IMPORTANT SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTIONS*

1. Get up at 4. a.m. daily. This is Brahmamuhurta which is extremely
favourable for meditation on God.

2. *Asana: *Sit on Padma, Siddha or Sukha Asana for Japa and meditation for
half an hour, facing the east or the north. Increase the period gradually to
three hours. Do Sirshasana and Sarvangasana for keeping up Brahmacharya and
health. Take light physical exercises as walking, etc., regularly. Do twenty
Pranayamas.

3. *Japa: *Repeat any Mantra as pure Om or Om Name Narayanaya, Om Namah
Sivaya, Om Name Bhagavate Vasudevaya, Om Saravanabhavaya Namah, Sita Ram,
Sri Ram, Hari Om, or Gayatri, according to your taste or inclination, from
108 to 21,600 times daily.

4.* Dietetic Discipline: *Take Sattvic food, Suddha Ahara. Give up chillies,
tamarind, garlic, onion, sour articles, oil, mustard, asafoetida. Observe
moderation in diet (Mitahara). Do not overload the stomach. Give up those
things which the mind likes best for a fortnight in a year. Eat simple food.
Milk and fruits help concentration. Take food as medicine to keep the life
going. Eating for enjoyment is sin. Give up salt and sugar for a month. You
must be able to live on rice, Dhal and bread without any chutni. Do not ask
for extra salt for Dhal and sugar for tea, coffee or milk.

5. Have a separate meditation room under lock and key.

6. *Charity: *Do charity regularly, every month, or even daily according to
your means, say six paisa per rupee.

7. *Svadhyaya: *Study systematically the Gita, the Ramayana, the Bhagavata,
Vishnu-Sahasranama, Lalita-Sahasranama, Aditya Hridaya, Upanishads or Yoga
Vasishtha, the Bible, Zend Avesta, the Koran, the Tripitakas, the Granth
Sahib, etc., from half an hour to one hour daily and have Suddha Vichara.

8. *Brahmacharya: *Preserve the vital force (Veerya) very, very carefully.
Veerya is God in motion or manifestationâ€”Vibhuti. Veerya is all power.
Veerya is all money. Veerya is the essence of life, thought and
intelligence.

9. *Prayer Slokas:* Get by heart some prayer-Slokas, Stotras and repeat them
as soon as you sit in the Asana before starting Japa or meditation. This
will elevate the mind quickly.

10. *Satsanga: *Have Satsanga. Give up bad company, smoking, meat and
alcoholic liquors entirely. Do not develop any evil habits.

11. *Fast on Ekadasi: *Fast on Ekadasi or live on milk and fruits only.

12. *Japa Mala: *Have Japa Mala (rosary) round your neck or in your pocket
or underneath your pillow at night.

13. *Mouna: *Observe Mouna (vow of silence) for a couple of hours daily.

14. *Speak the Truth: *Speak the truth at all cost. Speak a little. Speak
sweetly.

15. Reduce your wants. If you have four shirts, reduce the number to three
or two. Lead a happy, contented life. Avoid unnecessary worry. Have plain
living and high thinking.

16. *Never hurt anybody: *Never hurt anybody (*Ahimsa Paramo Dharmah*).
Control anger by love, Kshama (forgiveness) and Daya (compassion).

17. *Do not depend upon servants: *Do not depend upon servants.
Self-reliance is the highest of all virtues.

18. *Self-analysis: *Think of the mistakes you have committed during the
course of the day, just before retiring to bed (self-analysis). Keep daily
diary and self-correction register. Do not brood over past mistakes.

19. *Fulfil duties: *Remember that death is awaiting you at every moment.
Never fail to fulfil your duties. Have pure conduct (Sadachara).

20. *Surrender to God: *Think of God as soon as you wake up and just before
you go to sleep. Surrender yourself completely to God (Saranagati).

Om Tat Sat,

Sriram

