+++
title = "78 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-07-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024910.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024910.html)

Krishna stresses that even minor actions like unmiShan and nimiShan does 
not have the imprint of the "I-am-the-doer" thought in the tattva-vit. How 
then can there be any trace of "I-am-the-body" in him?

praNAms
Hare Krishna

When all the desires residing in one's heart have been got rid of, then 
the mortal being becomes immortal and attains brahman here, in this life. 
Just as the cast-off slough of a snake would lie lifeless in an ant hill, 
so also does the body of the enlightened person lie there, and he is now 
really bodiless, the prANa, brahman alone, the light of pure consciousness 
alone..says bruhadAraNyaka...Here it is quite obviously taught the 
complete effacement of the idea of one's identity with body due to the 
realization of one's identity with brahman, for the possession of a body 
was only through ignorance (says shankara in 1-1-4 sutra) while the 
intrinsic nature of bodilessness (ashareeratvaM) is revealed as soon as 
enlightenment dawns.  In the same upanishad subsequent maNtra says : I am 
verily this one should a person recognize Atman and know him directly in 
this manner, desiring what?? and for the fulfillment of whose desire?? 
Here again, it is quite evidently said that there cannot be any 
continuance of desire for an Atma jnAni and  that jnAni does not have to 
'manage' the desire that may occur in his mental factory, for the 
Atmaikatva darshi there cannot be origination of rAga dvesha at all !! 
Desirelessness is his natural state...

But I dont know whether tattva vida explained above is different from 
samyagdarshi or Atmaikatva darshi considering the different categories in 
brahma vida-s.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

