+++
title = "41 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-03-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044696.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044696.html)

Please read your own heading of the post. I do not thing that any useful
purpose is served by extending the discussion.

Quantum Physics came from Vedas: Schrödinger and Einstein read Veda's

regards,
Sarma.

On Tue, Mar 7, 2017 at 11:01 AM, V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> On Tue, Mar 7, 2017 at 12:26 AM, Shrinivas Gadkari via Advaita-l <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
> > Namaste,
> >
> > I think the point here is not that Quantum Physics came from Vedas.
> >
> >
> > A more palatable view is:
> > - There is mystery element in quantum physics. And this has got to
> > do with a conscious observer's involvement in bringing about collapse
> > of a wave function or localizing of a wave function.
> > - Now this interaction of conscious observer with the observed universe
> > that is implied by Quantum mechanics (but unfortunately not clearly
> stated)
> > set the best physicists wonder about what have other people who have
> > explored the nature of Consciousness concluded.
> > - In the Hindu and Buddhist philosophy they noted an in depth exploration
> > of the nature of consciousness and its influence on the creation.
> > - This made them draw parallels between Quantum theory and Vedas.
> >
>
> Dear Shrinivas,
>
> There can't be a better statement than the above capturing the heart,
> essence, of the thread. Thanks for articulating it so well.
>
> warm regards
> subbu
>
> >
> >
> > Regards,
> > Shrinivas Gadkari
> >
> >
> >
> >
> >
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
