+++
title = "132 ravi chandrasekhara"
date = "2001-10-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-October/002058.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-October/002058.html)

Pranam,

This is in response Shri Jaldhar Vyas's comments.
Doesnt the concept of adoption to create " new
Brahmans " contradict our shastras.  In the Kanchi
Acharya's (Shri Chandrashekarendra Saraswati) book
Hindu Dharma at www.kamakoti.org, he mentions in
several chapters that varna is based on birth and
states that "a new Brahman caste" cannot be created
per se.  It appears if one looks at all the Brahman
subcastes through out India: Kanyakubja, Saraswat,
Mohyal, chitpavan, Nambudiri, Telugu, iyer, iyengar,
Sivacharya, Karnatak Smarta and Madhva, Audich,
Naagar, Deshastha, Kashmiri pundit, etc; one finds the
same gotras and pravaras. Perhaps, the Brahman rishis
populated through their descendents various parts of
India and those living in the various regions fromed
endogamous subcastes of Brahmans as mentioned above.
Also the the Brahman rishis had great spiritual powers
and could they take birth in various times/etc like
Bhagawan does to account for the differing
creations/origins of Brahmans ?  Also if adoption is
valid, can a sudra (or even a non-hindu)adult be
adopted by Brahman and in turn became Brahman and
undergo the samskaras and be allowed to marry a
Brahman by birth ?; ----- I would suspect the Shastras
would this disagree with this.

Dhanyavaad, Ravi Chandrasekhara

