+++
title = "139 S.N. Sastri"
date = "2006-06-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-June/016859.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-June/016859.html)

Abhishek RK wrote on June 25, 2006:-

I found this article quite interesting. Request comments from the members.
"Escaping 'Hindu uncongenial India' to discover Hinduism in Britain"

http://www.hinduvoice.co.uk/Issues/6/Escape.htm



The article is excellent and brings out the current situation in our country
correctly. For many of our politicians and media 'secular' means only
'anti-Hindu'. The Muslim League has been given a berth in the 'secular'
Union Govt, while the BJP is shunned as communal. One Union Minister whose
name itself proclaims his Brahmin origin, takes pride in calling himself an
atheist. But according to a newspaper report some time ago, during a visit
to a Muslim country, while replying to a questioner he said that only Allah
knows the answer. His atheism does not deny Allah; it denies only Bhagavan,
Krishna, Rama, etc.

A newspaper in Chennai, founded 150 years ago by erudite Brahmins steeped in
our cultural, religious and spiritual tradition is now in the hands of
so-called secularists. The state governments competed with one another to
ban the Da Vinci code film, but they are supremely unconcerned about
M.F.Hussein painting Hindu goddesses in the nude because freedom of artistic
expression cannot be curtailed. But Hinduism is a mighty tree which cannot
be shaken by these pygmies. It has withstood many onslaughts and will
continue to do so. Fortunately the number of scholars learned in our
scriptures is increasing day by day and they are doing a magnificent job in
disseminating this ancient knowledge. More and more people are listening to
them and studying the scriptures and acquiring knowledge about our ancient
tradition, not only in this country but even abroad.

S.N.Sastri

