+++
title = "265 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2019-05-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052330.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052330.html)

Dear Members, The cause for birth is our own karma. Whether youdo good or bad, all that makes you take birth again and again, experiencethe consequences of our own karma. Our dharma, the Hindu dharma , is one whichhas faith in the doctrines of karma, of rebirth, and of the characteristics ofan Avathar.This will become veryevident to us in the story of Narasimha Avathar. The good karma of Prahlada andthe bad karma of Hiranya Kasipa are bothresponsible for Visnhuappearing in the form of Narasimha.Here is anotherstory. Once, when Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana were going to the forest in achariot, Dasaratha came running behind the chariot and shouted, “Stop, stop.”Samantha, who was driving the chariot, the Charioter looked at Rama as thoughasking Him if he should stop the chariot. Rama said, “Go on, go on.” After some distance,Samantha turned to Rama and said, “It would have been very good if I, too,could stay with you in the forest for years. But when I go back to the city,Dasaratha will ask me, ‘Why did you not stop the chariot?’ What shall I say?”Rama said, “Oh, say that you could nothear his words.” Is that an untruth? No,Surprisingly not what Rama said.There are manyreasons for this. Rama had to go to the forest, If he delays going, He would becausing great sorrow to his parents. There is another reason. In his capacityas king, Dasaratha had given a boon to Kaikeyi. To fulfill that boon, he hadbanished Rama to the forest [against his paternal inclinations]. But on the daywhen Dasaratha was asking the chariot to stop, he wanted to have another lookat Rama. He was acting in the capacity of a father, not a king. This order connected to the relationshipthat exists between a father and a son; it had nothing to do with a king.So Rama told Samantha, “You have obeyed the orders of your king. You did notobey the orders given by my father.” Weshould observe the important distinction that Rama made between king and father.Another examplewe can take from vamana avatar.
Sri Guru Padaravindarpana MastuKameswara
