+++
title = "267 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2019-05-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052340.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-May/052340.html)

Dear Members, There are two examples forthis one from Ramayana & the other from Mahabharata: This was the story of a Dharma Karta of temple from a tretayugaperiod. Once it happened that there was a fight between a sant (dharmicperson/wandering monk) and a back dog. The sant was in search of food sincemorning and he could not get any thing till evening and it was about to sunset,he could able to get some food to eat. So he thought, he will do arghaya pradan(water oblations to sun god during sunset) & wash his hands before he takesthe food. He was in search of some one whom he can kept that food which he gotwith great difficulty. Luckily, he could able to find one black dog (who was indisguise form), the sant requested the black dog to take care of the food, sothat he will come in minutes by doing sayamkala sandhya and he promised that hewill give little food also to that care taker dog. The sant went away to thepond to do his duty by leaving the entire food to that dog.Afterreturning from the pond, the sant was very furious, got agitated by knowingthat entire food was eaten by the black dog. So he warned the dog we willresolve the issue in the court of king Rama and there is no tomarrow for you asyou are the sinner which he can get the capital punishment if the matter provedto be right with evidence. It is due to that fact that the dog’s main job isthe loyality to his master/yagamana i.e who gives that job to you.Onthe next day in the court of Rama, hearing started, ever one is present and allcame to conclusion that this is very simple case and judgment is also simple togive the capital punishment to the dog as it agreed its mistake that he is notloyal to that sant and ready to take punishment. Before to pass the resolutionfor that day, Rama had a conversation with guru vasisth to take an advise asthe matter was so complicated although it looks simple. Vasistha told rama,there is no need of second thought here or take any other opinion, you justgive the capital punishment to that dog otherwise you have to convince me thatwhy you have not done that. It was verytough time to Rama to take a decision & explain to his guru.Hecalled that sant separately and told totake as many benefits as he can take from him and leave the matter here itselfwhat ever happened is happened. Since you survived without food for a day andyour anguish can be taken care by taking some other means and told him that hewill not give the capital punishment to that dog. ButRama has to convince vasishta about his decision and he went into deeper thoughts ( i.e hemight have gone to that time to know for whatpurpose the dog has taken its birth). Rama explained vasisth that this dogwas the ‘Dharma Karta’ in his previous Life, who takes care of the templeactivities. Rama could able to trace the previous birth of the dog and thereason to take the birth with his foresight. What happened was, In one of thetemple-Utsava murthi processions on a festival day there will be oil lamps lightening the godduring the procession till the lord completes its circumambulation. It washappened by mistake that the dharmakarta of that temple used that oil-lamplight to go to his house after the lord reached the temple. So he accumulated hiskarma there i.e the light helped to go to his home was not his, it is from the temple’smoney (Peoples Karma).The sage Vasistha appreciated rama forhis foresight and praised Rama for his dharma rule.My conclusion from the whole story is that, ifRama wants to punish the dog, no one can questions him as he is king & evidenceis there and the dog himself agreed its mistake.Thatis why even today Rama remain in the hearts of people as he was embodimentof Dharma. (Ramo vigrahavandharmah sadhu satyaprakramah)Sri Guru Padaravindarpana MastuKameswara




