+++
title = "16 tatha gat"
date = "2005-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014740.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014740.html)


--------------------------
3. Specific to Yoga, what is the place of Raja Yoga in
the Sankara mutts? And what is the traditional view on
the compatibility of Raja Yoga with Jnana, Bhakti and
Karma Yoga-s?

Swami Satyananda Saraswati, who is a dashanaamii
sanyaasi as the name indicates, refers to himself as a
follower of Advaita Vedanta. He also established the
Bihar School of Yoga, one of the leading Yoga-ashrams
in India today. The ashram itself claims to follow
Advaita Vedanta.
>From this it does appear that the concept of Ashtanga
Yoga as laid out by Maharshi Patanjali has been fully
absorbed in Advaita Vedanta.
----------------------------

Hello,

I think that yoga as a practice thrives in almost all
schools today, but yoga as a philosophy is definitely
rare (extinct?). Further, I have also heard of the
view that even in early times, Sankhya was the
theoretical counterpart and yoga was again simply a
practice. Now, Sankhya seems to have been usurped by
Vedanta.

FYI, a commentary on the yoga sutras by Shri
Shankaracharya has been recently found and published.
Here is a synopsis from the author's webpage :
http://www.leggett.co.uk/sys.htm





____________________________________________________
Sell on Yahoo! Auctions Â– no fees. Bid on great items.  
http://auctions.yahoo.com/

