+++
title = "39 bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com"
date = "2005-07-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014789.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014789.html)


praNAms Sri Venkat Subramani prabhuji
Hare Krishna

Venkat prabhuji:

By the way, in the introduction to the Naishkarmya Sidhi commentary
(kleshapaharini), Swami Sachidananendra points out to clashes even between
Sri Shankara's own commentary (on the topic of Prana Vrithi (i.e. whether
Prana is anu or vibhu).  He points out to the scoffing remark of the Brahma
Sutra Bhasyakara on the view point held by the Brihadaranyaka Bhashyakara.
If this is the case with the same authoer, we cannot expect that two
authors would be identical.

bhaskar :

Yes, swamiji himself discusses these very conspicuous differences between
bruhadAraNyaka & sUtra bhAshya of shAnkara..This is where he says since
these trifle differences in *vishaya pratipAdana* donot do any harm to mUla
siddhAnta of shankara, it can be contextually reconciled without taking any
deviation from mUla siddhAnta.

Venkat prabhuji:

In Vedanta Prkriya Prathyabigna, he reconciles the one major difference
between Sri Shankara and Sri Suresvarachayra on Avidya; wherein for the
former it is Adhyasa and for the latter it is Mithyaajnana.   Thus, he is
aware of even deeper differences if i can say so.

bhaskar :

its all boils down to splitting of the compound word mithyAjnAna as
mithya+jnAna or mithya+ajnAna & consequences of it.. is it not??  swamiji
thinks that by propagating bhAvarUpa avidyA or mUlAvidyA, later
commentators have diluted shankara siddhAnta.  He argues vehemently against
it.  mAndukya rahasya vivrutti is the classic example of swamiji wherein he
discusses this issue in length taking sushupti reference & kAraNAvidya in
it!!! I think, he appropriately justified his stand before claiming
bhAvarUpa avidyA is alien to mUla shankara siddhAnta.

Venkat prabhuji:

Interestingly, Polakam Sri Rama Shastrigal, the ex. Prof. of Madras
Sanskrit college in Vedanta has written a lengthy introduction in his
edition of Pancha Padika, where he has taken this issue of Swami
Sachidanandendra.  Shastrigal says that Swamiji's views are already there
in Nagesha Bhatta.  Swamiji himself has written about this in his
compilation of articles published by Adhyatma Prakasha karyalaya.

bhaskar :

I think you are talking about the book *vEdAntins meet* correct prabhuji??
In that work itself he clarified how the views of nAgEsha bhAtta is
different from that of his & clearly showed to the readers how Sri Rama
Shastrigal's claims are baseless.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



