+++
title = "37 Anand Hudli"
date = "2006-12-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-December/017951.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-December/017951.html)

yakSharAjasakhaM bhagAkShaharaM bhujaN^gavibhUShaNaM

    shailarAjasutA-pariShkR^itachAruvAmakalevaram.h |

kShveDanIlagalaM parashvadhadhAriNaM mR^igadhAriNaM

     chandrashekharamAshraye mama kiM kariShyati  vai yamaH || 5||

yakSharAjasakhaM - the friend of Kubera (yakSharAja)

bhagAkShaharaM   - One who took away the eyes of bhaga, one of the Adityas, 
during the fight between VIrabhadra and dakSha in the svAyambhuva manvantara

bhujaN^gavibhUshhaNaM - snakes as ornaments

shailarAjasutA - pArvatI

pariShkR^itachAruvAmakalevaram.h - the beautiful left side of the body 
adorned

kShveDanIlagalaM - blue throat due to poison

parashvadhadhAriNaM - one who bears the axe

mR^igadhAriNaM- one who holds a deer

chandrashekharamAshraye - I seek refuge in Shri Chandrashekhara (Shiva) (the 
Lord who bears the moon on His head)

mama kiM kariShyati vai yamaH - what will Yama (Death) do to me?

He is the friend of the YakSha king, Kubera. During the fight between dakSha 
and VIrabhadra, bhaga, one of the 12 Adityas, lost his eyes. Shiva wears 
serpents as ornaments and the beautiful left side of the body is adorned by 
pArvatI.His throat has turned blue due to the poison (He holds in it). He 
holds an axe with one hand and a deer in another. I seek refuge in that 
Chandrashekhara (Shiva)(the Lord who bears the moon on His head). What will 
Yama (Death) do to me?

bheshhajaM bhavarogiNAmakhilApadAmapahAriNaM

    dakShayaGYarvinAshanaM triguNAtmakaM trivilochanam.h |

bhuktimuktiphalapradaM sakalAghasaN^ghanibarhaNaM

   chandrashekharamAshraye mama kiM kariShyati  vai yamaH || 6||

bheshhajaM - medicine, remedy

bhavarogiNAm - of those afflicted by the disease of saMsAra, worldly 
existence

akhilApadAmapahAriNaM - one who gets rid of all calamities

dakShayaGYarvinAshanaM - the destroyer of the yajna of dakSha

triguNAtmakaM - of the nature of (the essence of) the three guNas,

trivilochanam.h - one who has three eyes

bhuktimuktiphalapradaM - one who bestows the rewards of enjoyment (fruits of 
actions) and liberation

sakalAghasaN^ghanibarhaNaM - one who destroys the multitude of all sins

chandrashekharamAshraye - I seek refuge in Shri Chandrashekhara (Shiva) (the 
Lord who bears the moon on His head)

mama kiM kariShyati vai yamaH - what will Yama (Death) do to me?

Shiva is the remedy for those who are suffering from the disease of wordly 
existence. He, the destroyer of the yajna of dakSha, gets rid of all 
calamities, and is of the nature of (the essence of) the three guNas - 
sattva, rajas, and tamas. He, the three-eyed Lord, bestows the rewards of 
enjoyment (of the fruits of actions) and liberation, and destroys the 
multitude of all sins. I seek refuge in that Chandrashekhara (Shiva)(the 
Lord who bears the moon on His head) What will Yama (Death) do to me?

Anand

_________________________________________________________________
Get the latest Windows Live Messenger 8.1 Beta version.Join now. 
http://ideas.live.com


