+++
title = "74 Ravisankar S. Mayavaram"
date = "2000-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001455.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001455.html)

Dear Members,

Many of you may be aware of the mailing list Advaitin. If you are
not, you can know more about Advaitin at

http://www.egroups.com/group/advaitin/

Purpose of this mail is to enable a free exchange of information
between Advaita-L and Advaitin and foster a friendly
relationship. To achieve this following addition to the list
policy will be  made.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
1) To facilitate free exchange of information between Advaita-L
and Advaitin:

a) Any message posted in Advaita-L can be forwarded to Advaitin
without prior permission from the author.

b) The article must be forwarded in its entirety and no editing
will be accepted (unless it is done by the author himself).

c) Either by retaining the article header and/or by indicating
the WWW url, credit to the author must be given.

d) Only moderators of Advaitin and Advaita-l, or the author can
forward the mail. This is to ensure no repetition happens.


2) Members of Advaita-L are encouraged join Advaitin. This way
you can directly contribute to both the lists and also benefit
from the discussions that happen there. Please read their list
policies and scope, and make sure that you meet their
requirements and also the list meets your needs.

----------------------------------------------------------------

When we update our List-FAQ* we will add this segment to it.
shrii Ram Chandran (founder and one of the moderators) of
Advaitin has assured me that they will reciprocate this gesture.

Thanks.

Ravi

On behalf of List Moderators of Advaita-L.


* I guess we have not posted this for ages. We will try to post
it more regularly (once a month) soon. May be we should automate
it.

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

