+++
title = "98 Chelluri Nageswar Rao"
date = "1997-06-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-June/006551.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-June/006551.html)

                                         Srim

Namaste!

I am posting this brief narration of saptasati at the request of Sri Vidya
for the benefit of all interested members.

Saptasati is very sacred not only for shakti upasakas but to all who believe
in divine mother.  The name Saptasati implies that there are seven hundred
mantras.  Such a group of mantras is called mantramala.  Saptasati is in
Markandeya Purana which I believe is in Brahmanda Purana.  Brahmanda Purana
(english version is available in all major librariries).   Thanks to Dr.Murty
when he was at Univ. of Michigan he borrowed and loaned it to me.  If you
have time try to read Brahmanda Purana.

A person who intends to perform Chandi Homa (Havan), first has to be
initiatedby a guru of his choice. My gurus are Paramasiva and Adishankara.
 (Sadasiva samarambham, Shankaracharya madhyamam, asmad guru i.e., my SELF).
 Once initiated into the sacred mantra of Sri Chamundesawari, one gets the
right to do the parayana (recite) of Saptasati.

The text has three parts.  The first part is called Pradhama Charitra with 1
chapter. The presiding deity for the first part is Sri Maha Kali.  The second
part is called Madhyama Charitra comprises of chapters 2,3 and 4.  The
presiding deity is Sri Maha Lakshmi.  The third part is Uttama Charitra
consisting of chapters 5 through 13.  The presiding deity is Sri Maha
Sarasawati.

The first part describes how mahamaya appears to Brahma and then wakesup Sri
Mahavishnu who was in yoga nidra to destroy the demons Madhu and Kaitab.  The
story is  told by Mahamuni Sumedha to a king Suradha in exile 'cause of
corrupt ministers and a Vaisya named Samadhi driven out by his own greedy
family for money. Inspite of away from their abodes their attachments and
affection still lingers on and they want to know Why? and what makes it
happen that way.  Maharishi attributes it to mahamaya.  No one is exempt
except one who attained Jnaanam.
Bhagawan Ramana Maharishi is a great example.

The second part deals with Mahisasura Vadha.  This is most important part of
saptasati.    The third part describes how Devi kills the demons Shumba and
Nishumba who terrorize all lokas (worlds).

After listening to the story the king and Vaisya does tapas and pleases Devi.
 She gives them varas (boons).  The king wants to become emperor and the
Vaisya askes for knowledge Jnaanam. She grants both their wishes.  The king
becomes a Manu Savarni. I can not go into the details of Manu, may be
somebody can post on this topic.    Anyway,  We now live in a manvantaram
called Vaivaswata, kali yuga, pradhama padam.   God, do we have a long way to
go!.

There is a secret meaning behind the three parts which correspond to the
three gunas only a scohlar can comment.   Devi is so kind, merciful and
compassionate she assures that she will be plesed whether one does it
knowingly or unknowingly.

To know more about saptasati and its hidden meaning one needs to go to a
Guru.

Shubhamastu                                   Nageswar

I will post about chandi havan (homa) at a later date.

