+++
title = "69 Dr. M. Giridhar"
date = "1998-06-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-June/008891.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-June/008891.html)

>Is there somewhere I can get a copy of the Voice of Divinity?

        In US, it is available in several libraries, including the
University of California libraries. One can also check with

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
305, Seventh Avenue, 17th Floor,
New York 10001
Tel. (212)989-8383

        and atleast get the book 'Hindu Dharma: The universal way of
life.' My home page also lists several bookstores
        http://www.geocities.com/RodeoDrive/1415/hbooks.html

Most of them will order a copy of 'The voice of divinity' for you.
I only have the tamil edition with me, which can be ordered from Chennai.

        I would also like to recommend a great site which contains several
megabytes of Kanchi periyava's teachings,
        http://www.kamakoti.org

Thanks

>From  Sat Jun  6 12:47:42 1998
Message-Id: <SAT.6.JUN.1998.124742.0700.>
Date: Sat, 6 Jun 1998 12:47:42 -0700
Reply-To: chandran at tidalwave.net
To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
        <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ram Chandran <chandran at TIDALWAVE.NET>
Organization: Personal
Subject: Re: What is adhikAra? (fwd)
Comments: To: Advaita List <advaita-l at tamu.edu>
Comments: cc: Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian <ramakris at EROLS.COM>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian <ramakris at EROLS.COM> writes:

> Really, can you enlighten us your view of "culture"?
> I have read a book by Munshi and if it's the same one (he repeated the
> same story about atharva veda being primitive) it would be good to throw
> the book into the trash can. In short, the guy has no common sense.

Greetings Rama:

I understand your concern about "culture." Since, Hinduism has no
authoritatve source book, all sorts of commentaries and comparisons
emerge at different points of time. The book, "Hindu Samskaras -
Socio-Religious Study of the Hindu Sacraments" by rajbali Pandey,
published by Motilal Bararsidas Publishers, Delhi (1993) also contains
similar citation.  " The Atharvaveda reflects the faith and rites of the
common people rather than the highly specialized religion of the
priests." (Page 4, first paragraph).

Those who don't like such books could exercise the option of throwing
them on the trash can.  I am not one of them and I was always find some
some valuable materials in everybook.  I find that the human mind is the
Biggest Trash Can and continues to collect the garbage from the day of
birth.  I have also seen some human mind takes every opportunity to
throw the accumulated trash on others through the sense organs.  This is
why Lord Krishna in Gita suggests to all of us to control our sense
organs  to prevent us from accumulating and throwing trash on each
other!  Let us use our common sense and learn to be nice to each other
and this is a Win-Win Proposition!

Ram Chandran
Burke, VA 22015

>From  Sat Jun  6 15:34:40 1998
Message-Id: <SAT.6.JUN.1998.153440.0400.>
Date: Sat, 6 Jun 1998 15:34:40 -0400
Reply-To: ramakris at erols.com
To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
        <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian <ramakris at EROLS.COM>
Subject: Re: What is adhikAra? (fwd)
Comments: To: Advaita-L <advaita-l at tamu.edu>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Ram Chandran wrote:

> I understand your concern about "culture." Since, Hinduism has no
> authoritatve source book, all sorts of commentaries and comparisons
> emerge at different points of time. The book, "Hindu Samskaras -
> Socio-Religious Study of the Hindu Sacraments" by rajbali Pandey,
> published by Motilal Bararsidas Publishers, Delhi (1993) also contains
> similar citation.  " The Atharvaveda reflects the faith and rites of the
> common people rather than the highly specialized religion of the
> priests." (Page 4, first paragraph).

I don't care if a thousand books carry such citations. I guess if you
read a thousand neo-nazi flyers you'll become a nazi?

I also consider myself a common man, not in the highly specialized
elitist group which you seem to belong to. I guess my "intellect" is
preventing me from joining this "highly specialized religion" (sic)!

> Those who don't like such books could exercise the option of throwing
> them on the trash can.  I am not one of them and I was always find some
> some valuable materials in everybook.  I find that the human mind is the

This of course means you have the best intellect to churn out the good
out of every "book". Go tell the current head of the Kanchi Mutt, the
successor of the person you quoted, about atharva veda being primitive
and write to us his response.

> Biggest Trash Can and continues to collect the garbage from the day of
> birth.  I have also seen some human mind takes every opportunity to
> throw the accumulated trash on others through the sense organs.  This is
> why Lord Krishna in Gita suggests to all of us to control our sense
> organs  to prevent us from accumulating and throwing trash on each
> other!  Let us use our common sense and learn to be nice to each other
> and this is a Win-Win Proposition!

A win-win proposition in my opinion is not to trash veda-s which have
been revered by _all_ schools of thought, and then pat each other on the
back for parroting the opinions of people who have nothing better to do
other than parrot the opinion of Max Muller or whoever. If that's a
win-win proposition I'd rather be on the lose-lose side.

I have no use for all this feel good philosophizing which you seem fond
of.

Rama.

