+++
title = "121 Kishoore via Advaita-l"
date = "2014-09-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-September/037456.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-September/037456.html)

Dear All,

Loving Sairam to you.Hope you are doing well.

As you are aware that Sanathana Dharma is declining in Rural India, We have
personally noticed this fact and started serving our bit by establishing
Sri Maha Lakshmi Temple institution. As we are not very knowledgeable in
spiritual practices and also not physically living in India therefore we
want to run these Temple institutions in the guidelines Sri Jagadguru
Shankaracharya Peethams. We strongly believe & feel that whatever hard work
we have done & doing for this project will only reach its goal with the
Divine guidance of Sri Jagadguru Shankaracharya.

I have approached Sringeri  Dakshinamnaya Sri Sharada Peetham to get the
blessing of  Sri Jagadguru Shankaracharya Sri Sri Bharati Tirtha
Mahaswamiji but as I am new to this lineage none responded for my request.
next best option is Sri Kanchi Kamakoti Peetam Kanchipuram , I have high
regards towards Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswathi Swamigal. but don't know
anyone in that peetam, can any one guide me how to get blessing from
present Swamiji of that peetam please.All I need to get Blessing for
the *statues
*of Sri Mahakali,Sri Mahalakshmi and Sri Mahasaraswati.

Main problem I notice is that when I say that I am devotee of Bhagawan Sri
Sathya Sai Baba varu then these peetams (CEO or Managers) won't help me
instead they suspect me for nothing. How can I hide my guru/god identity?
This is very bad i have noticed in Hinduism.

*Can any one guide me how to get Sri Jagadguru Shankaracharya Peethams
blessings and guidance for this project please .*

Our's temple is going to be a Tri Shakti Temple with the main goddesses Sri
Mahakali,Sri Mahalakshmi and Sri Mahasaraswati , which is similar lines to
Kolhapur Sri Maha Laxmi temple.

Please find the latest photos of Sri Maha Lakshmi Amma Vari temple in the
following link
https://plus.google.com/u/0/photos/114980246490071149285/albums/6053769314486821633

With Best Regards
Kishoore Chelikani
0044-7872383637

Please consider the environment  - do you really need to print this e-mail
