+++
title = "104 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-07-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024902.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024902.html)

I am sorry.

> The 'impossible' in my above-quoted paragraph is not the ability-dependent
> ones that you quote from the 12th chapter.  What I mean is:  Such an event
> itself is an impossibility for any human being.

1. Your example as an event is not impossible. rAhu could eat up moon.
2. If impossible for human being, which was not stated in the message, it is 
wrong to treat jnAni as an ordinary human being.
3. If you want to mean an injunction is unnecessary for an event impossible 
by human beings, the injunction to refrain from telling lies to the human 
being who feels he can somehow make untruth as truth can be cited as 
example.

> And I think you have taken my word 'aprsaktasya' to some other word
> 'aprashaktasya'.  'prasakti' is different from 'prashakti'.  The former
> means:  an occasion, room for something to happen, a possibility.  I do 
> not
> see any meaning for the second word in the context I have used the term.

3. VS Apte dictionary gives the meaning thus:

aprasakta - not attached or connected, moderate, temperate, unconnected.

if you take the meaning of 'occurance of possibility' of prasaktiH and add 
negative participle then it will be 'non-occurance of possibility' and not 
'occurance of impossibility'.

> [The craving for food, sleep, fear of enemy and the craving for copulation
> is the same for the animals as well as humans.  What distinguishes the 
> human
> from the animals is that in all these four Dharma is the guide for the
> human.  If dharma is given a go by, man is no different from an animal.]

If there is a distinguishing feature between man and animal, won't there be 
any between jnAni and ajnAni. 


