+++
title = "76 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2006-01-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015618.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015618.html)

Namste:

  I think the key operative word here is "kaamanaa".  Even a sannyasi has a desire for moxa.  That is why aShTaavakaa stresses the importance of recognising the the kaamanaa as the root.

  vaasanaa eva sa.nsaara iti sarvaa vimu~nca taaH .
tatyaago vaasanaatyaagaat sthitiradya yathaa tathaa .. aSTaavakra giitaa 9\.8 ..

  aShTAvakra says - One who realizes that sansar is directly related to desire (vaasanaa) becomes liberated (mukta).  After that what exists, how it exists is all acceptable. .  

  (A personal Note: Couple of year ago my mother passed away.  I traveled to India to be with her as she was already in the hospital. During her final moments very early morning, I was the only relative who was present at her bed side and was holding her hands and she uttered her last words "Now having seen you in person and talked with you, I have no other desire left".  It was one of the most profound experience I ever experienced.  At that time aSTAvakra's words echoed in my ears.  Therefore this will always remain a very special shloka for me.   

  I think, this statement is more profound that geeta where it recommends us to have no attachments with the outcome (phalaakaa.nxaa) because one does not need to go through the who process and then rejecting attempting to reject the end point   As we know, everything that is manifested for us as human beings must start with a desire for same

  vidnyaate saaxipuruShe paramaatmaani ceshvare .
nairaashye bandhamoxe ca na cintaamuktaye mama .. aSTaavakra giitaa 14\.3 ..

Here Janaka says to Ashtravakra - once you understand the purusha, as being the observer, all the desires have diaappeared including the desire for moksha

  Just some thoughts.

  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu

"Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at braincells.com> wrote:
    On Mon, 9 Jan 2006, Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian wrote:

>
>
So I suppose this is reassuring to those who still desire but I don't see 
it as providing a carte blanche. I don't see why this means one shouldn't
avoid desire as much as s possible as Sanjay said.

-- 
Jaldhar H. Vyas 



---------------------------------
 Yahoo! DSL Something to write home about. Just $16.99/mo. or less

