+++
title = "166 Praveen R. Bhat"
date = "2008-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020525.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020525.html)

praNAm all,

Hari Om, Marko,

On Thu, Jul 31, 2008 at 9:37 PM, Marko Gregoric <markogregori at gmail.com> wrote:
> Dear Praveen!
>
> 1.How can there be such thing as a seeker which cleans the mind?

Hah! a neat play of words by the mind, my dear friend. Lets get back
to your original mail and analyze the same using your recent Qs:

"The mind will always try to tell you that you are not self-realised
yet. Don't believe it."

Apply your recent Q.1 to this and ask whom the mind will tell? Is that
you as the seeker? If that, the mind is the seeker as per you; then
the mind is telling itself. If it can tell itself, so can it clean
itself, can't it? If its not the mind, then that you are different
from the seeker/ mind? To whom is the mind talking to then? It has got
to be the seeker, different from the mind, who else will listen to the
mind and analyze it? Can the real you listen, etc?

"It will always put new conditions."

To whom? As above again.

 "With
self-realisation the mind still works the same old way. It always
wants something different from what is there."

Self realization of whom? It can't be of the mind, of course. Then
who's thats realized? The seeker.

If the seeker's the mind, whats the ego then? Is that seeker too and
therefore the mind as well? Well, the mind is a bunch of thoughts, if
you are looking from even Nisargadatta Maharaj's works. A bunch of
thoughts belong to the seeker, they are not the seeker though!

>
> 2.How can somebody speak with a dead mind?
>

The same way that someone can live and speak without thinking, so can
one speak with a dead mind, can't one?

Anyway, we can go endlessly on this thread asking each other umpteen
Qs and basing them on our experiences, but the dialogue's definitely
adding no value. I don't want to disprove your statements or
experiences, but point out that a confused person and a person having
immense experience will likely sound same. One has to decide for
oneself which is which. I responded to the original thread not knowing
that it will amount to playing 20 Qs. :)

Best wishes,
--Praveen R. Bhat
/* Through what should one know That owing to which all this is known!
[Br.Up. 4.5.15] */

