+++
title = "147 Sriram Krishnamurthy"
date = "2007-08-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019282.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019282.html)

*RAKSHA BANDHAN* is called Avani Avittam in South India. This falls on the
full moon day of the month of Sravan (August-September). It is an important
Hindu festival. Hindus wear a new holy thread and offer libations of water
to the ancient Rishis on this day.

Recitation of the *Vedas *on this great day is highly beneficial. This
festival is also known as Upakarmam, and is specially sacred to the
Brahmins, who have been invested with the sacred thread.

When a Brahmin boy is invested with this thread, symbolically his third eye,
or the eye of wisdom, is opened. The holy festival of Upakarmam reminds one
who wears the sacred thread of its glorious spiritual significance. Brahmins
also offer libations of water to their ancestors, to whom they owe their
birth; to the great Rishis, to whom they are highly indebted for their
spiritual knowledge; and to the *Vedas *themselves. The true Hindu never
forgets his benefactors!

The followers of the four different *Vedas *have their Upakarmam on
different days.

On this day, Sachi, the consort of Indra, tied a holy thread or amulet
around the wrist of Indra, when he was defeated by the demons. Then Indra,
the king of gods, gained victory over the demons by the power of this
protection (Raksha means "protection"). He then recovered the lost city of
Amaravati.

In North India, on this day, an amulet known as a Raksha or Rakhi, is tied
round the wrist of brothers by the sisters as a protection from evil during
the coming year. Brahmins and Purohits similarly tie amulets round the
wrists of their patrons and receive gifts. A Mantra is recited when the
Rakhi or the silken thread is tied. The silken thread is charged with the
power of the Mantra, which is as follows:

Yena baddho balee raajaa daanavendro mahaabalah;

Tena twaam anubadhnaami rakshey maa chala maa chala.

"I am tying on your hand this Raksha, with which the most powerful and
generous King Bali himself was bound; O Raksha, don't go away; don't go
away."
The power of this Mantra protects the wearer from evil influences.

Om Tat Sat,
Sriram

