+++
title = "200 Ramakrishnan Balasubramanian"
date = "1996-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005570.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005570.html)

I was looking for the shiva giita from the padma puraaNa a short while back and
got it by ILL thanks to info from Giri. Now I am looking for a bhaashhyam on
the same text by shrii abhinava nR^isimha bhaaratii, 24th pontiff of the
Sringeri maTha, circa 1600. He was also an expert on mantra shastra. Vidya also
gave me info that there are some other bhaashhyams on the same text, eg, by
either sadasiva brahmendra or his guru (I can't recollect what he said). But he
did not know if these had been published. Does anyone know if these have been
published or if anyone has either could you please send me mail? Thanks.

Here's some info on the shiva giita which I posted on srh some time back:

I was reading a book describing all puraaNas and important chapters from them.
I believe that the padma puraaNa has a chapter called shiva giita (shiva's
instructions to raama). The book also described the main features of the shiva
giita. I quote from this book ("The Puranas" - by Ludo Rocher):

"Even as in the BG Krsna consoled Arjuna by removing his objections against
engaging in battle with his relatives, in the Siva Gita Agastya consoles Rama
about his losing Sita to Ravana. Agastya tells Rama that Agastya tells Rama
that by performing viraja diksa, he will win both Siva's grace and defeat
Ravana. Rama performs the diksa on the bank of the Godavari; Siva appears and
provides Rama with divine weapons to battle Ravana; he also allows Rama to see
him as identical with the universe, and encourages him to question Siva as his
guru. The latter half of the text is, then, concerned with the teachings of
Siva, the development of the embryo and the human life; the gunas, elements,
and bodies; the individual soul and it's relation to the cosmic soul and the
body; death and re-birth; Siva worship; the five types of liberation (salokya,
sarupa, saratya, sayjya, kaivalya) and how to achieve them; the five kosas that
envelop the soul; rituals for Siva bhakti; the individuals entitled to
liberation. The Siva Gita is less dependent on the BG than most puranic Gitas,
but it contains several quotations from the Upanisads, the Atharvasiras,
Svetasvatara, Isavasya, and, above all, the Kaivalya which it follows in
combining Siva bhakti with advaita."

Ramakrishnan.
--
Utinam logica falsa tuam philosophiam totam suffodiant (May faulty logic
undermine your entire philosophy)           -- strong Vulcan curse
                  http://yake.ecn.purdue.edu/~rbalasub/

