+++
title = "137 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2019-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-August/053131.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-August/053131.html)

In the Book 'Edifying Parables' is an account of Acharyal's observations.
He says just on one particular case, of many:

As in the case of worldly matters, there are norms and exceptions with
regard to what is ordained by the scriptures. The rule is that a
Brahmachari must bathe in the morning before sunrise, don Vibhuthi, a Namam
or Gopi Chandanam in accordance with his tradition and only then perform
Sandhyavandanam. Suppose that a Brahmachari has fever and the doctor tells
him, “Do not bathe today. If you do so, your ailment can turn serious.”
Should he still bathe and only then perform Sandhyavandanam? No. He can
apply Vibhuthi or whatever else is dictated by his tradition and thereafter
perform Sandhyavandanam without taking a bath.
Suppose the situation is worse and even Vibhuthi and sufficient water are
not available. It is said, “He who remembers God becomes externally and
internally pure, regardless of whether he was impure or pure or in any
state earlier.” In keeping with this, he should think of God and pray, “O
Lord, I am unable to access even water. How then am I to bathe? Further, I
do not even have the strength to do so right now. But it is said that any
good activity should be done while being pure. For me to become pure, there
is just You, the purest of the pure. So, I think of You.” If after such a
sincere prayer, he were to perform Sandhyavandanam, God would accept it.

The rule is that Sandhyavandanam should be performed after properly sitting
down cross-legged. Suppose the Brahmachari in question were so sick that he
cannot even sit up. Then, it is permissible for him to perform his
Sandhyavandanam mentally while lying down in his bed, without bathing or
donning Vibhuthi.
On hearing of this position of the Shastras, a boy perversely decided, “In
winter, there is no need for me to take bath. I can just do Sandhyavandanam
straightaway, while in bed. On the other hand, in summer, I can bathe
thrice and perform Sandhyavandanam.” This is not a conclusion based on the
scripture; it is dictated merely by the desire for comfort.

End of quote

What is striking is the Acharya's universal reach of the message. His
including Naamam and Gopi chandanam along with Vibhuti speaks volumes of a
true Vedantin's vision of the society.  A non-Vedantin would limit his
advice to only a section of people not bothering to include others.  That
is the difference.

warm regards
subbu
