+++
title = "79 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2007-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019218.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019218.html)

Namste:

  I am remindinded of Bharatasaavitri from mahaabhaarata.

  uurdhvabaahurviraumyeSha na ca kashcicchhR^iNoti me |
  dharmaadarthashca kaamashca sa dharmaH kaM na sevyate ||


  Meaning - I am shouting loudly while; raising both hands, but no one
  seems to be listening. When kaama and artha are easily achieved
  through dhama then why is it that you do not embrace the dharma?#


  shrutidharma iti hyeke netyaahurapare janaaH |
  na ca tatpratyasuuyaamo na hi sarva vidhiiyate || ma. bhaa. shaanti || 109.13 ||


  Meaning - Some say that dharma is expressed in the shruti, where as
  other do not think so. We need not take sides in this case because
  everything cannot be said in the shruti (Veda).

  Kind Regards,

  Dr. Yadu

srikanta at nie.ac.in wrote:
  With reference to the above,I would like to add that,without knowing
"dharma" which means the Ashrama Dharma as
Brahmachari,Gruhastha,Vanaprastha it is not possible to reach the
"Sannyasa"order(which is the qualification for Moksha)for the common
people.Hence the sastras prescibe the stages.The socalled "Vividisha
Sannyasa" is for the Sarvakarma sannyasi.Sri.Shankara in his Brahmasutra
Bhashya says that it is possible to start Jnanakhanda without going
through the Karmakhanda if one possesses the qualifications of
Shama,dhamadi shatkasampatti.It is not also possible to know about the
Moksha without knowing the why and wherefore of it.
N.Srikanta.


_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
Yahoo! oneSearch: Finally,  mobile search that gives answers, not web links. 

