+++
title = "85 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013411.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013411.html)

Namaste.

51.
taj-jnAH pashyanti buddhyA parama-balavato mAyayA-ktaM
patangaM 
buddhA-vantaH samudre prati-phalita-marIcy-AspadaM
vedhasas-taM /
yAdRg-yAvAn-upAdhiH pratiphalati tathA brahma tasmin 
yathA’’yaM 
prAptA-darshAnurUpaM prati-phalati yathA-vasthitaM
sat-sadaiva //

tat-jnAH vedhasaH : The knowers of the Self
pashyanti : realise
buddhyA : by their wisdom
taM patangaM : the individual soul
mAyayAktaM : to have been made to appear  by mAyA
pratiphalita-marIcy-AspadaM : as only a ray, reflected
antaH samudre buddhau : in the ocean of consciousness
parama-balavataH : of the omnipotent Self.
brahma : Brahman
pratiphalati : reflects
tasmin : in the medium
yAdrK yAvAn upAdhiH yathA tathA : according to the nature
and content of it (the medium) 
ayaM : (just as ) this (object)
pratiphalati : reflects
prApta-Adarsha-anurUpAM :  variously according to the
mirror on hand.
Sat : The Reality (however)
Sada eva : all the time
yathA avasthitaM : is what it is.

Note 1: The object that is reflected remains as it is,
irrespective of the various reflections. So also the
Ultimate remains the same, irrespective of the 
multiplicities that we see.

Note 2. Recall Rg Veda X-177 here. The Acharya must have
given this shloka as a paraphrase of that famous rik. See
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/advaitin/message/23304

52. 
eko bhAnus-taTasthaH pratiphalana-vashAt
yas-tv-aneko-dakAntaH 
nAnAtvaM yAty-upAdhi-sthiti-gati-samatAM cApi tadvat
parAtmA /
bhUteshh-UccAvaceshhu prati-phalita ivA-bhAti
tAvat-svabhAvA-
vacchinno yaH paraM tu sphuTam-anupahato bhAti
tAvat-svabhAvaiH //

ekaH bhAnuH : The one Sun
taTasthaH : impartial (to every object)
pratiphalana-vashAt : by virtue of reflection
anekodakAntaH : in several waters
nAnAtvaM yAti : becomes multiplied
(yAti) : (and also) obtains 
upAdhi-sthiti-gati-samatAM : equality with the status of
rest as well as movement of the medium.
tadvat : So also
parAtmA : the Supreme Self
AbhAti iva : seems to be 
svabhAva-avacchinnaH tAvat : affected by the natural
properties
pratiphalitaH : of reflection 
uccAvaceshhu : high and low
bhuteshhu : in living beings .
paraM tu yaH : But the same Self 
sphuTam-anupahataH : when perfectly in the ‘unaffected’
stage
bhAti :   shines
svabhAvaiH tAvat : by its own natural properties. 

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya
profvk


=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

