+++
title = "11 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2004-03-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-March/012747.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-March/012747.html)

hrIm.h is explained in detail in some of the names of trishatii bhaashhya.
I don't remember any of them directly bringing in the meaning of "modesty".
However, one of the synonyms of modesty, "lajjaa" is used as a code word for
hriim.h. For instance, the name lajjaa-pada-samaaraadhyaa in trishatii has a
hidden meaning that ambaa is worshipped with hriim.h, lajaa pada is taken to
mean hriim.h as lajjaa is hrii.

Ravi

> -----Original Message-----
> From: savithri devaraj [mailto:savithri_devaraj at yahoo.com]
> Sent: Thursday, March 04, 2004 5:54 PM
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Re: purusha sUktam & nArAyaNa sUktam
>
>
> Namaste Sri profvk,
>
> > The word 'hrIH' means 'Modesty'.  'shrIH' means
> > Wealth and Prosperity. The line 'hrIshca te
> > lakshmIshca patnyau' says that 'Your Consorts are
> > Modesty and Prosperity.
> >
> > The word 'hrIH' is a very significant word in
> > Vedanta. Shankara in his Bhashya on Sanatsujatiya,
> > writes for 'hrIh' : "akArya-karaNe lajjA" -- sense
> > of shame in doing the wrong thing!
>
> just curious,
>
> Is hrIH related to 'hrIm' - one of the bIjAksharas for
> the devi? Do they both mean the same?
>
> Savithri
>
> __________________________________
> Do you Yahoo!?
> Yahoo! Search - Find what youre looking for faster
> http://search.yahoo.com
> _______________________________________________
> want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> Need assistance? Contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>


