+++
title = "494 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-09-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-September/029296.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-September/029296.html)

One is really surprised by the strong feelings that are being expressed
about SSS.

Since many commentators differ in their interpretation of Sankara
giving rise to the Bhamati, Vivarana etc., prasthanas, SSS can have
his own prasthana. Trouble will arise only if there is a claim that only
one prasthana interprets Bhagavatpada correctly and others do not.
It should be left to the readers to choose who according to them
is the closest to the original.

Here I may point out that there are schools which consider Sankara
himself is not sufficiently radical enough in his presentation of advaita.
Some people consider Gaudapada to be more radical than Sankara.

Another exposition of advaita which is more nascent is that of Ribhu Gita.

regards,
Sarma.


On Thu, Sep 29, 2011 at 7:37 AM, V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>wrote:

> On Wed, Sep 28, 2011 at 10:49 PM, Subramanya Uchangi Hiriyannaiah <
> subramanyauh at gmail.com> wrote:
>
> > Dear Ramakrishna,
> >
> > It is very sad to read that one should avoid SSS vyakhyana of NS. Mr
> > Ramakrishna has not justified why it should not be read! Ask pooja
> shasthri
> > to clarify. Is she competent to comment on a Brahmajnani? A true Sanyasin
> to
> > the core, than who heads Mutts.
> >
>
> The above indeed is a sad commentary on the Jivanmukta AchAryas of the
> tradition who have also headed muTTs.
>
> ..............

>
> In fact  rAga for one's guru and dwesha for other AchAryas has already been
> given expression to in the above allegations.  The comments made against
> the
> Acharyas of tradition have been indeed made without any justification.
>
> Regards,
> subrahmanian.v
>
> >
> >
> >
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

