+++
title = "60 srikanta at nie.ac.in"
date = "2008-04-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/019998.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-April/019998.html)

In his Email of April27 on the above topic,Sri.ananta Bhagawath has not
explained how the pratitya-samutapada can be applied to Finite
Automata.Fuzzy logic allows different states and not necessarily two
states as said by him.But Pratitya-samutpada of the madhyamaka Buddhism
recognises only two truths,the samvrti satyam and the paramarthika
satyam.In the samvrti satyam,all constructions are mental with no
substratum and the paramarthika satyam is "Sunya" which is void.This void
is beyond explanations,not confined within the chatuskoti,according to
Nagarjuna.It can be seen that Adwaitha also recognises two truths,the
vyavaharika satyam and the paramarthika satyam.In the vyavaharika state
the world is real.In the paramarthia state the world is "tucca",and
Brahman is real.For the appearance of the world,Maya has to be acepted
which is sadasadvilakshana,as neither real,nor unreal,yet cannot be
disposed as both real or unreal,hence the Brahman is "chatuskoti
vinirmuktha",is free from the four pronged states,as it is,it is not,itis
not it is not,it s it is not" of the four considerations belonging to the
different schools.
True,Adwaita cannot be applied in  toto to  modern science,so also the
pratitya-samutpada theory of madhyamaka Buddhism,as it requires clear
explanation.One ends in sophistry.The Anekanta vada of the Jainism has in
its conceptual state,the Fuzzy logic.That is why Buddhism is not
sruthiadharita tarka,which fails explanation.

Bhava Shankara Desika me Sharanam.                 N.Srikanta.
Bhava Shankara Desika me Sharanam.


