+++
title = "118 egodust"
date = "1996-06-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/005000.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/005000.html)

Namaskaaram.

Notwithstanding my withdrawal from this debate, after further
consideration I believe it's incumbent upon me to make this
final statement re the samadhi state.  As always, a rebuttle
is welcome, but for reasons outlined below, I will likely
refrain from further response.

Please also bear in mind [and it goes without saying] that
regardless of the fervor in any of these exchanges, the highest
regard--and even admiration!--is ever maintained.

*********

Samadhi is the annihilation (temporary or permanent) of the
ego-Mind.  This, by definition, includes all relative values.
Based on what I've discovered, as well as what the sastras
overwhelmingly confirm: there is no room for compromise in this.
This indicates that ALL concepts and precepts are incapable of
[isolated] assertion, including ideas of logic, truth, love,
goodness, satva or even samadhi or moksha.  These are all
relative values.  Like waves on the ocean or jewelry made of
gold, they are polarized concepts unique to the power structure
of the phenomenal world.

Here's a sample from what the sastras tell us:  RIBHU GITA, ch43
v29, "The jnani is ... devoid of any thought of bondage or
freedom."  And TRIPURA RAHASYA, ch18 v156, "The greatest of all
delusions is the conviction that knowledge is not a delusion.";
IBID, ch22 v14, "There is no doubt that a man realizes the Self
only after purging himself of all thoughts."; IBID, ch14 v18,
"Samadhi is simply the absence of thoughts."  (NOTE: This is a
meager sampling.  Conversely, where do the sastras support the
claim that the Absolute Reality upholds attributes (thoughts) of
any conceivable quality or import, be they thoughts of logic,
truth, freedom, or ANY other relative value?!)

Within the samsaric trap, if the ego is to dissolve itself, it must
be willing to release virtually everthing it has come to depend
upon [for its life support].  This includes all the Mind pets.

This is a very simple observation.  Any sophisticted reasoning/
intellectualization that is conjured to refute it, can only
represent the Mind's reactive self-preservation instinct. The
Mind's fear of the death of its Reason is even greater than its
fear of the death of its body.

*********

My readiness to withdraw from this debate--or any protracted
debate, for that matter--is based on an unwillingness to
reinforce illusion by sparring in the boxing-ring of the Mind.
For, not only is it a provocation for becoming entrenched in
maya, it also tends to fulfil the ego's insatiable hunger for
further developing relative attachments.

Renunciation is the renunciation of the ego-Mind.  Anything less
perpetuates illusion, bondage, separativeness and ignorance.
We have to be willing to give up everything; as I hereby declare
that all here writ shall also burn in the fire of renunciation.

                Nothing knowable shall remain;
                For, whatever does,
                Then and there
                Becomes our ball and chain.

OM NAMAH SHIVAYE.

praNaam.

