+++
title = "292 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-08-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028678.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-August/028678.html)

This comparision between vedic mantras and Newton's law of Gravitation does
not seem to
be  right. Newton's law talks of things that can be verified by any body
with an apparatus.
But स्वर्गकामो यजेत cannot be verified.

Science talks of natural, observable and verifiable things. Veda does not.
As a matter of fact purva mimamsa says that vedas are unverifiable because
they talk of supernatural
things and hence other pramanas cannot be made to operate in the verfication
of vedas.
Vedas derive their प्रामाण्य because you cannot disprove them.

As a matter of fact purva mimamsa threatens that if you transgress its
injunctions either knowingly are unknowingly ,
you will suffer just as a person person who touches fire knowingly are
unknowingly.

All vaidic injunctions are for Hindus and mostly for dvijas. They are not
universal like
Newton's Laws. I do not think that the other communities are who do not
follow  vedic
injunctions are suffering because of that. This cross has to be borne by
Hindus only.

As somebody has pointed out, it is impossible in the modern world to follow
the all the injunctions
of the veda. We have long back modified or sometimes omitted following some
of them.
Thus in India, to find any body who foollows vedic injunctions to the letter
is almost impossible.

I can understand the desire to put vedas on an unassailable pedestal but it
has to work.

regards,
Sarma.

On Fri, Aug 19, 2011 at 12:42 PM, Venkata sriram P
<venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>wrote:

> Namaste,
>
> Just wanted to ask what is "apaursheyatva".  My idea of "apaursheyatva" is
> something like this:
>
> Let us consider with the example
> "Newton's Law of Gravity".
>
>

