+++
title = "120 krishna koundinya"
date = "2010-11-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025786.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025786.html)

Pranam to All,
                       I recently joined the forum and found the
discussions to be full of content. I 21 years old  and am a novice in
spiritual matters.I have some questions to ask to which I am sure to
get good answers by the scholars here and I ask some of these from the
dvaitin point of view.

1) It is said that Lord Hari is Sarvottama ( which he is for sure) &
he is the antaryami ( as

saint Annamacharya also eulogizes in his keertanas) and is also the
antaryami for anya

devatas( like brahma, shiva etc). Dvaitins explain that whenever he
prays to other devatas (

as in when Lord Sri Krishna prayed to Lord Shiva by taking Shiva
deeksha from sage upamanyu or

Lord Sri Ram prays to Lord Shiva) he actually prays to ANTARYAMI of
that anya devata which is

the lord himself, so taratamya is not viiolated. Are there any shastra
pramanas for this ( for

or against).  please quote from vedas or only the " sattvic Puranas".
I hope you understand

why I insist on " sattvic puranas".

2) I read in some Madhva forums that the Lord keeps the rajasic and
tamasic souls ( I dont

understand how soul has gunas) in delusion, and only sattvic souls are
eligible for moksha.

Are there any shaastra pramanas stating this condition..( Bhagavvam
Ramana Maharishi says that

everyone is eligible for moksha )..Also does the atman has form??

3) In the debate between Sri Vidyaranya swamy & akshobhya muni,
Vidyaranya swamy could not defend the position of the mahavakya" Tat
Twam Asi" and Sri Vedanta Desikar pronounded akshobhya muni as the
winner by saying "Asina tatvamasina parajiva prabhodina Vidyaranya
maharanyam Aksobhyamuni raccinath". Why did this happen and how should
we understand this?

Thank you.
Krishna.

