+++
title = "41 K. Sadananda"
date = "2001-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-October/001970.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-October/001970.html)

Thanks Ken for your kind comments.

>
>
>To the postings on karma with its subsections of
>prarabhda and sanchit I would like to offer some words
>from the gospel of St John. I do so because as one who
>studies advaita, confident in its validity, I would
>say that from the point of view of brahman/atman such
>a discourse has  relevance only in the world of the
>limitations, upadhis. It is only from a position under
>the veil of maaya that we can discuss such matters as
>karma.

True - from advaita point.  It is not just the upaadhis - but
ignorance involving that "I am the upaadhi-s" -  which you pointed as
maaya that manifests as ignorance at the individual level.  Any
discussion is only at this level. Cause-effect relations and the time
concept are all within this realm only.

>The text is St. John Chapter 9, Verses 1-5.
>'And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind
>from his birth.  And the disciples asked him, saying,
>Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he
>was born blind?  Jesus answered, Neither has this man
>sinned, nor his parents; but that the works of God
>should be made manifest in him. I must work the works
>of him that sent me, while it is day; the night
>cometh, when no man can work.  As long as I am in this
>world, I am the light of this world.'
>Now view this in the light of the teachings of
>advaita. Is it not a beautiful teaching of Jesus?

Yes, provided it is correctly interpreted.  Misinterpretations of
Jesus statements are  so-prevalent that one has to be very careful to
see the universality of these statements.

>Finally, may I add congratulations and thanks to the
>administrators of this listing in joining the magic
>500+ club although this tickles my odd sense of humour
>as we seek to understand that which is 'not two'.

Yes, you are right.  But I get the feeling that there is mix up of
dvaita in the advaita lists in your statement! -I am not sure if the
advaitaL list also has also reached 500+ members or it is only the
advaitin list that Shree Ram Chandran referred to.  It does not
matter - the purpose of both lists is the same and both are doing an
excellent work.

Hari OM!
Sadananda


>Om sri ram jai jai ram
>Ken

Y
--
K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623

