+++
title = "48 G. Kameshwar"
date = "2005-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014741.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014741.html)

Sri RM's had posted a query (given below):

> 
> Message: 3
> Date: Wed, 6 Jul 2005 18:54:12 +0530
> From: Ramesh Murthy <rkmurthy at gmail.com>
> Subject: [Advaita-l] New member intro: Ramesh Murthy
.
> >From this it does appear that the concept of Ashtanga
> Yoga as laid out
> by Maharshi Patanjali has been fully absorbed in Advaita
> Vedanta.
> 
>  But I would like to know the stand of the Sankara mutts
> on this. Do
> the Shankaracharyas practice asana-s, pranayama, etc?
> They would
> certainly be practising dhyaana (meditation), but is
> there a
> difference between Patanjali's concept of Dhyaana and Adi
> Sankara's?
> 

- Sankara Bhagavatpada was a supreme yogi. Translation of
His treatise "yOga tArAvaLi" is available from
Krishnamacharya Yoga Mandiram...(refer also to his para
kaaya pravesam in his biography)

- Sri Vidyateertha, Acharya of Sringeri Mutt was a supreme
yogi...So, was Sri Abhinava Vidyateertha...(he was referred
to as Crest Jewel of Yogis...)...(Sri Vidyateertha's
undertook Nirvana by entering into Lambika yoga
samadhi...his samadhi sthala is the Vidyashankara temple at
Sringeri Mutt)

Coming back to Patanjali - Patañjali defines yoga (in
Yoga-Sutra I.2) as chitta-vritti-nirodha i.e cessation of
mental movements (functions) - which, to mind, means the
state of Nirvikalpa Samadhi - the natural state of supreme
Self Abidance of Jagadguru Acharya Sankara Bhagavatpada.

Regards





____________________________________________________
Sell on Yahoo! Auctions – no fees. Bid on great items.  
http://auctions.yahoo.com/

