+++
title = "27 K. Sadananda"
date = "2001-07-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-July/001720.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-July/001720.html)


My thanks to Shree Sunder, Siddhartha and Vidya - for responding to
my post on maaya and nirguNa.

In all fairness to Sreemaan Chari -  He was referring to in his
analysis that in the sense Bhagavaan Shankara used the concept of
maaya in the doctrine of advaita there is one place in the upanishat
and that is from Swetaashvatara Up. Yesterday he did mention about
use of the maaya word in the Br. Up. but said it is not in the
context of meaning that Bhagavaan Shankara used in the advaita
doctrine.  Giving the benefit of doubt, I need to look at the
contextual use of the word.

  Also nirguNa in the description of the nirvishesha Brahman occurs
only ones.   I am sure Shreeman Chari also recognizes that it is not
number game, but given that importance of a given concept will be
more if it has been referred to many a times - like the way Uddalaka
repeats 'tat tvam asi swetaketu' - I will try to write a summary of
his talks when they are over.

In discussing the dual nature - nirguNa Brahman from the absolute
point and jagat kraaNa Brahman - Iswara- from the tatastalakshaNa  or
from the point of upaasana- scriptural support to this dual, should
we say nature, occurs only once in Prashna Up. in term of para and
apara akshara Brahman.

I am learning from his lectures, a perspective, I was not fully aware
- whether I agree with him or not is a separate question-  When I
take up the comparative analysis of Shankara Bhaashya with Ramanuja
Bhaashya, I hope to address the issues that he has raised.

Hari Om!
Sadananda



>These are some of the references among the 108
>upanishads. There are some others - gopichandana,
>chuulikaa, also.
>
>maayaa:
>
>bR^ihadaaraNyaka u. II:v:19
>indro maayaabhiH puru-ruupa iiyate .
>
>shvetaashvatara:
>I:10 vishva-maayaa nivR^ittiH .
>IV:9 tasmi.nshchaanyo maayayaa sa.nniruddhaH .
>      asmaanmaayii sR^ijate vishvametat .
>IV:10 maayaa.n tu prakriti.n viddhi .
>       maayina.n tu maheshvaram .
>
>prashna:
>I:16 na maayaa cheti .
>
>nR^isi.nhapuurvataapinii:
>III:1 maayaa vaa eshhaa naaras.nhii
>       maayaametaa.n shakti.n vidyaat .
>       ya etaaM maayaa.n shakti.n veda .
>V:1 maayayaa vaa etatsarva.n veshhTitam .
>     naatmaanaM maayaa spR^ishati .
>     maayayaa bahirveshhTitam .
>     kshetra.n kshetra.n vaa maayaishhaa sampadyate .
>V:9 maayayaa hyanyadiva .
>     maayaa cha tamoruupaanubhuuteH .
>     evamevaishhaa maayaa ..kshetraaNi darshayitvaa .
>     muuDha iva vyavahaarannaste maayayaiva .
>     maayayaa naasa.nvittiH svaprakaashe .
>
>nR^isi.nhauttarataapinii :
>1. trayamapyatat sushhupta.n svapnaM maayaamaatram .
>5. ida.n sarva.n yadayamaatmaa maayaamaatram .
>maitrii:
>IV:2 indrajaalamiva maayaamayam .
>
>sarvasaara u:
>I. aatmaa maayaa cheti katham .
>IV.saa maayetyuchyate .
>
>kR^ishhNa:
>5. maayaa saa trividhaa proktaa .
>6. maayaa tredhaa hyudaahR^itaa .
>7. ajayyaa vaishhNavii maayaa .
>11. hariH saakshaanmaayaavigrahadhaaraNaH .
>12. maayayaa mohita.n jagat .
>13. tasya maaya jagatkatham .
>
>raamapuurvataapinii:
>III:1 tato raamo maanavo maayayaadhaat .
>
>kaivalya:
>I:12 sa evaM maayaaparimohitaatmaa .
>___________________________________________________
>
>nirguNa:
>
>shvetaashvatara:
>VI:11 saakshii chetaa kevalo nirguNashcha .
>
>brahma u.:
>       saakshii chetaa kevalo nirguNashcha .
>
>maitrii:
>VI:10 asya nirguNo bhoktaa .
>VII:1 nirguNaH shuddho bhaasvaraH .
>
>sunder
>
--
K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: </archives/advaita-l/attachments/20010724/6516bafb/attachment.html>
