+++
title = "154 Allan Curry"
date = "1997-04-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-April/006294.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-April/006294.html)

Namaste

I would like to add a few comments to the recent discussion concerning the
spiritual conduciveness of India, Maruti-s, sannyas, etc.  versus  American
shopping malls, Toyota Corollas, Kingship, fatherhood, etc.

It occurs to me lately that even experiencing great bliss, light, etc.
might not be any more significant from the perspective of awareness than
any other experience.  If Purusa is of the nature of simple awareness, then
perhaps spiritually conducive environments are ones where awareness is
present.  But what if awareness is omnipresent! If we find anything
anywhere isn't it only because that appearance reflects the pre-existing
light of awareness or is occuring against the background "screen" of
awareness?

There are sincere aspirants here and there I'm sure, all over the world,
and I'm confident they will find their way as a result of their own
sincerity. If I can speak poetically, "God" knows who they are and is not
stingy in meeting their needs. If they were stranded in an American
shopping mall (God forbid!) with an intense desire for liberation, how
could God refuse them there?

Of course, at the same time, nobody but the uninformed will fail to
acknowledge the tremendous debt the whole world will always owe to the
spiritual genius of India.  What a repository of wisdom it is!  It seems to
me that it has all been worked out and demonstrated and documented many
many times already in India. I sincerely hope that the Indians themselves
will succeed in preserving what amounts to the spiritual treasure house of
the world long enough for the rest of us to realize its value.

Namaskaar

-a.c.

P.S.
I have driven in Maruti taxicabs in India and it certainly stimulated
an experience of intent "alertness" if not *real* awareness!  :-)

