+++
title = "177 Chandran, Nanda (NBC)"
date = "1998-03-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-March/008326.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-March/008326.html)

Somebody sent me this and I thought some of the netters might be
interested ...
*************************************************8
*** NOTE: 'Song of the Hindu', as given in  Bhagwan S. Gidwani's book,
Return of the Aryans , is drawn from ancient texts and tradition, and
presented by the author in modern version by clarifying  phraseology and
terms which may appear  obscure or  archaic in present times due to
transition of so many centuries***


-
SONG OF THE HINDU
- WHO IS A HINDU? - his Identity, his Duty, and his Mission -

(Composed in times of Karkarta Bharat, and sung in Bharat Varsha in 5000
B.C.)

- Reproduced from 'Return of the Aryans' by Bhagwan S. Gidwani (pages 65
& 82-83) -


"Our desires have grown immeasurable But they should be desires to give,
not merely to receive, to accept and not to reject; to honour and
respect, not to deny or belittle...

"God's gracious purpose includes all human beings and all creation...

"For God is the Creator; and God is the Creation...

 "Each man has his own stepping stones to reach the One-Supreme...

"God's grace is withdrawn from no one; not even from those who have
chosen to withdraw from God's grace...

"How does it matter what idols they worship, or what images they bow to,
so long as the conduct remains pure...

"It is conduct then - theirs and ours - that needs to be purified...

"There can be no compulsion; each man must be free to worship his gods
as he chooses...

"Does every Hindu worship all the gods of all the Hindus? No, he has a
free will; a free choice...

"A Hindu may worship Agni (fire), and ignore other deities. Do we deny
that he is a Hindu? ...

"Another may worship God, through an idol of his choosing. Do we deny
that he is a Hindu?...

"Yet another will find God everywhere and not in any image or idol. Is
he not a Hindu?...

"He who was Karkarta before me was a Sun-worshiper. Did the worshipers
of Siva ever say that he was not a good Hindu? ...

"Do the worshipers of Vishnu feel that he who worships before the image
of Brahma is not a Hindu?...

"How can a scheme of salvation be limited to a single view of God's
nature and worship?...

"Is then God, not an all-loving Universal God?...

"Clearly then, he who seeks to deny protection to another on the basis
of his faith, offends against the Hindu way of life, and denies an
all-loving God...

"Those who love their own sects, idols and images more than Truth, will
end up by loving themselves more than their gods...

"He who seeks to convert another to his own faith, offends against his
own soul and the will of God and the law of humanity...

"In the Kingdom of God, there is no higher nor lower. The passion for
perfection burns equally in all, for there is only one class even as
there is only one God...

"The Hindu way of life?... Always it has been and always it shall
be...that God wills a rich harmony - not a colorless uniformity...

"A Hindu must enlarge the heritage of mankind...

"For a Hindu is not a mere preserver of custom ...

"For a Hindu is not a mere protector of present knowledge...

"Hinduism is a movement, not a position; a growing tradition and not a
fixed revelation...

"A Hindu must grow and evolve, with all that was good in the past, with
all that is good in the present, and with all goodness that future ages
shall bring ...

"Yet he remains a Hindu...

"Hinduism is the law of life, not a dogma; its aim is not to create a
creed but character, and its goal is to achieve perfection through most
varied spiritual knowledge which rejects nothing, and yet refines
everything, through continuous testing and experiencing...

"Yet he must remain strong and united, for a Hindu must know that not an
external, outside force can ever crush him, except when he is divided
and betrays his own...

"What then is the final goal of the Hindu? Through strength, unity,
discipline, selfless work, to reach the ultimate in being, ultimate in
awareness and ultimate in bliss, not for himself alone, but for all...

"This was the silent pledge that our ancient ancestors had taken, when
they called themselves the Hindu...

"If I cannot abide by that pledge, how can I retain the right to call
myself a Hindu?"

(Extracts reproduced from 'Return of the Aryans', by Bhagwan S. Gidwani,
published by Penguin Books Ltd. in India & Canada - ISBN 0-14-024053-5).

NOTE: Bhagwan S. Gidwani's 'Return the Aryans' clarifies that Bharat (in
whose time  the SONG OF THE  HINDU was composed) was the 19th Karkarta
(Elected Supreme Chief) of the Hindu clan from 5,106 BC. He retired as a
hermit at the age of sixty. Long after he retired, the name Bharat
Varsha was given to the country to honour his memory.

The book unfolds the drama of the birth and beginnings of Hinduism prior
to
8,000 BC, and its early roots of Sanatana Dharma and Sanatanah. It also
tells the story of how in 5,000 BC, the Aryans originated from India,
and why they moved out of their homeland; their trials and triumphs in
Europe and elsewhere, including Russian Lands, Finland, Lithuania,
Scandinavia, Italy, Greece and Germany; and finally their  return to the
hometown and heritage of Bharat Varsha (India).



        Because e-mail can be altered electronically,
        the integrity of this communication cannot be guaranteed.

