+++
title = "107 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2003-05-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-May/011221.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-May/011221.html)

Namaste,

I am Krishna. I have been having some questions on the
Advaita tradition since my last (un)subscription way
back in 1997; so I am trying to get back to the list
to ask those questions.

Here's one:

I came across a Kannada translation of a
Shankara-vijaya, which contained a chapter devoted to
the discussions, various groups of people held with
the advaita-AchArya. The biographer narrates such
discussions with people worshipping yaj~na varAha,
agni, vAyu, indra. There are more mentioned there, but
this is what could meet the eye's cursory look. The
followers of yaj~na varAha discuss the high position
of yaj~na varAha and the marks his followers that are
expected to have on their bodies. Shankara says that
such marks are avaidika in nature. Any information on

(i) the shankara vijaya being translated and if a
sanskrit original is easily available,
(ii) the specific verses dealing with these
discussions and
(iii) details on those worshippers of specific deities
(esp., varAha, vAyu and indra) including their
geographical details

would be highly appreciated. Being in a hurry I could
not gather this information.

dhanyavAdAH,
Krishna

