+++
title = "234 Venkatraghavan S"
date = "2016-03-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040658.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-March/040658.html)

Namaste Sri Srinath,
My answers in line.

«Isn't is saying "you know what, there never was a snake at all" is same as
negation?»
No that is just a statement of fact, after the negation has happened. No
new knowledge is generated by making the statement of a known fact.

«It seems you are holding negation process which happens during realization
in vyavahAra is different from denying snake/world from pAramArtha point of
view. »
Not so, for above reason.

«Tell me something - if you knew something does not exist do you need to
negate it's existence after knowing so?

Same here, if you know something does not exist, don't you use negation
sentence when somebody ask you for teaching aid?»

Yes. Please note that here we are talking of negation in the context of
removing *one's own* false conceptions of reality of the world.  It is not
a discussion of the various instances when negation sentences can be used.
One can use a negation sentence to teach others (as was said in the
original quote which you pasted - "as a teaching aid".

«The sense in which you are clarifying now, it seems your position "no need
for negation" is equivalent to "no need for (further) negation (after
realization)". This is not correct according to quoted bhAShya»

That is just an assertion, not an argument. Point out the specific instance
in the quoted bhAshya  where it is not correct and justify why you believe
it to be so.

«The gist is: To say that 'by negating the world, the Advaitic Brahman is
known' is also a teaching aid; really speaking there is no world at all to
be negated. It is not that the world exists, which is negated. The world
does not exist at all in the first place for it to be negated.//End Quote
Please note the denial of negation in the *first place* here. My reply was
based on this denial./sv»

As I said, this is said from the point of view of paramArtha. To a jnAni
the world does not need to be negated because he knows it to be mithyA -
it doesn't exist at all in three  periods of time in Brahman, the locus
where the world is cognized. To a person who is not a jnAni and perceives
the world to be satyam, he needs to be taught that the world needs negation.

Regards,
Venkatraghavan
