+++
title = "85 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2012-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-November/033564.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-November/033564.html)

Hari Om Shri Subrahmanianji, Pranaams! 
> 
> But then we have the entire first chapter and the first ten verses of the
> second chapter of the gita not commented by Shankara and commented  by
> others of the Advaita sampradaya. In fact Anandagiri and Dhanapati suri who
> have commented on the bhashya, write on these verses independently.
> Madhusudana Saraswati too has commented on these verses.

We can only say Acaryaji has not commented in detail for these verses. He has included and given the purport of these verses in his bhAShya.


> 
> The purported 13th chapter first verse, of course, has not been commented
> upon by these Acharyas too.  I have heard Swami Paramarthananda mentioning
> this verse and giving out the meaning too, before going into the popular
> first verse of the 13th chapter.  He says, when we include that verse, we
> find the 13th chapter in perspective.
> 
> subrahmanian.v
> 

If we take into account AcAryaji's bhAShya words ' dRRiShTvA tu pANDavAnIkam (1.2) iti Arabhya. . .  one need not take verse of dhararitarAShTra but consider arjunA's verse 13.1 to make the count 700.

Still the position will be same. One verse not considered/commented by AcAryaji.

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya




