+++
title = "16 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2004-04-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-April/012931.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-April/012931.html)

As quoted in the last part of the text (PDF file), it is best to celebrate
on sudhha chaitra maasam, shukla paxa, navami thithi with punarvasu naxatra
during madhyAhna kaalam. But in the case of smArta-s, tithi takes precedence
over naxatra. That portion of the text is quoted in the both samxepa dharma
shaastram (which I have) with tamil translation.


Differences, between smArta and shriivaishNava schools also occur based on
tithi vs naxatra (not just determination of tithi). shriivaishNava
sampradayam, has leanings towards sauramana -- for them (often) naxatra
takes precedence. Even their ramanuja jayanti is based on naxatra, and for
us shankara jayanti is based on tithi.


Typically you see this even today in how birthdays are celebrated by tamils
(smArta-s, shriivaishNava-s) and the rest. Assuming one is born in
sauramanaa miina maasa, uttarashhaaDa naxatra (chandramaana phaalguNa maasa
k-navami). Typically, who follow chandramaana will observe it on phaalguNa
k-navami, for them naxatara is secondary. On the other hand, sauramaana
people will go by naxatra.  Sometimes, both coincide.

This year in the US, 29th madhyAhna had both navami and punarvasu naxatra.
That was the ideal date for rAma navami. And it was so marked (correctly) in
the calendars I had.

My 2c. I may be wrong.

Ravi


> -----Original Message-----
> From: Ajit Krishnan [mailto:ajit at mudgala.com]
> Sent: Friday, April 02, 2004 1:47 AM
> To: 'A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta'
> Subject: RE: [Advaita-l] DATE FOR SRI RAMA NAVAMI
>
>
> Dear Jaldhar,
>
> I only know a little about festival calculation, and it is certainly
> possible that I am wrong. I have a Sanskrit document which may
> shed a little
> light on this discussion. Unfortunately, I can't read Sanskrit yet. If you
> have a few minutes, could you please translate the following document?
>
> http://www.mudgala.com/rama-navami.pdf
>
> 	ajit
>
>
>
> > -----Original Message-----
> > From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org [mailto:advaita-l-
> > bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org] On Behalf Of Jaldhar H. Vyas
> > Sent: Thursday, April 01, 2004 1:18 PM
> > To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> > Subject: RE: [Advaita-l] DATE FOR SRI RAMA NAVAMI
> >
> > On Mon, 29 Mar 2004, Ajit Krishnan wrote:
> >
> > >
> > > There are two general schools of thought regarding the celebration of
> > tithi
> > > based festivals. Some choose the vedic day when a particular tithi
> > occurs at
> > > the time of observance, while others choose the vedic day
> when the tithi
> > > occurs at sunrise. I have been taught to use the tithi at the time of
> > > observance.
> > >
> > > Based on my limited observations, smarthas seem to prefer the tithi at
> > the
> > > time of observance, while dvaitin-vaishnavas seem to prefer
> the tithi at
> > the
> > > time of sunrise.
> > >
> >
> > Is a matter of sampradaya and not say a regional difference?
> Because the
> > Gujarati mandirs around here all chose the 30th regardless of
> affiliation.
> > True, some of them might not have known the niceties of panchang
> > calculation but others have knowlegable Pujaris who I would
> expect to know
> > such things.
> >
> > --
> > Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
> > It's a girl! See the pictures - http://www.braincells.com/shailaja/
> > _______________________________________________
> > want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> > Need assistance? Contact:
> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
> _______________________________________________
> want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> Need assistance? Contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>


