+++
title = "39 Aditya Varun Chadha"
date = "2006-01-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015584.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015584.html)

I think this thread is going nowhere. I do not think there is any kind
of "hatred" between sanAtan dharma and buddhism. Sweeping statements
suggesting otherwise are not in good taste. In any case, what
supporters of one tradition think about another tradition is
immaterial to the path of either tradition.

As members of the advaita list, we are not even experts on the subject
if advaita, far less on the subject of buddhism. Having said this,
obviously there are differences of opinion about "Truth" between
advaita and buddhism. A truly objective comparison is guaranteed NOT
to bring out the "superiority" of one over the other (because it is
like comparing two sets of axioms that define parallel logics). And
any subjective comparison (like the one Jaldhar ji has referred to) is
just that: subjective, and therefore its validity is limited among
people who already believe in the validity of one set of axioms.
Subjective comparisons don't prove anything and thus are USELESS.
Objective comparisons cannot prove that one is correct and the other
is not. So just try to take in verifiable facts, and see what best
fits you.

Contrary to what some people might think, I do NOT think that all
opinions are discussable in a neutral and intellectually responsible
manner. Only an enlightened being can objectively know the Truth.
Since the two traditions differ in their very notion of Truth, they
are incomparable objectively within mAyA. Within mAyA, we can only
cling on to our subjective beliefs, and hope that our faith coupled
with consciencious positive intellect will guide is correctly.

By talking about buddhism in this list we are making the same mistake
that we condemn westerners like Max Muller so often for.

--
Aditya Varun Chadha
adichad AT gmail.com
http://www.adichad.com

