+++
title = "01 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2018-11-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050887.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050887.html)

Brahman, Nishkriya, 'creates' by mere presence

In the Vishnupuranam occurs a long description of creation. The following
verses are especially interesting in view of their unique advaitic flavor:

प्रधानपुरूषौ चापि प्रविश्यात्मेच्छया हरिः  ।

क्षोभयामास संप्राप्ते सर्गकाले व्ययाव्ययौ  ॥ १,२.२९ ॥

यथा सन्निधिमात्रेण गन्धः क्षोभाय जायते  ।

मनसो नोपकर्तृत्वात्तथासौ परमेश्वरः  ॥ १,२.३० ॥

स एव क्षोभको ब्रह्मन् क्षोभ्यश्च पुरूषोत्तमः  ।

स संकोचविकासाभ्यां प्रधानत्वेपि च स्थितः  ॥ १,२.३१ ॥

विकासाणुस्वरूपैश्च ब्रह्मरूपादिभिस्तथा  ।

व्यक्तस्वरूपश्च तथा विष्णुः सर्वेश्वरेश्वरः  ॥ १,२.३२ ॥


Then the supreme Brahman, the supreme soul, the substance of the world, the
lord of all creatures, the universal soul, the supreme ruler, Hari, of his
own will having entered into matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and
immutable principles, the season of creation having arrived, // in the same
manner as fragrance affects the mind from its proximity merely, and not
from any immediate operation upon mind itself:// so the Supreme influenced
the elements of creation. Purushottama is both the agitator and the thing
to be agitated; being present in the essence of matter, both when it is
contracted and expanded. Vishńu, supreme over the supreme, is of the
nature of discrete forms in the atomic productions, Brahmá and the rest
(gods, men, &c.)

The significant points above are:

1. Brahman has no active role in creation; its role is merely passive.

2. The example of fragrance affecting the mind by its mere proximity
without the operation on the part of the mind is applicable to the Advaitic
Brahman.

3. Brahman is able to influence the elements required for the creation
process by mere presence.

4. What comes out in creation is Brahman itself in those forms. Brahmaa,
etc. gods and all jivas are Brahman alone in those forms.

5. This is Brahman becoming 'many'.

Sridharaswamin's commentary brings out the points clearly.

Shankara has said in the Br.Up. antaryami brahmanam:  3.7.3 देवताकार्यकरणस्य
ईश्वरसाक्षिमात्रसान्निध्येन हि नियमेन प्रवृत्तिनिवृत्ती स्याताम् ;
Brahman, the antaryami, 'impels' the body-mind-organs of all beings by its
mere sentient presence. In the proximity of the sentient Brahman, the
insentient elements get impelled into doing the acts they are designed to
perform.

Om Tat Sat
