+++
title = "26 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-08-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001421.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-August/001421.html)

Jaldhar H. Vyas wrote:

> On Tue, 8 Aug 2000, H.B.Dave wrote:
>
> > 1 represents the One, Brahman and 8 represents 8 Adityas (Mitra, Varuna,
> > etc.)
>
> shouldn't that be Vasus?  I thought the canonical "33" Vedic Devatas were
>
>  8 Vasus
> 11 Rudras
> 12 Adityas
>  2 Ashvins
>
> Is this right?  Please clarify.
>
> --
> Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>

Yes, you are right and what I wrote is also right! In the older scripture,
especially in RigVeda,
only 8 Adityas are mentioned. Later scripture, especially in Pauranik,
mentions 12 Adityas.
Both are correct in their own way. As the theory of states of consciousness
developed, more states
were found to be necessary to describe the total phenomena of a conscious
human being. RigVeda
contains several models for states of consciousness -
2 states (div and p.rthivii or rodasii),
3 states (div antarik.sa and prithivii)
6 states (the six seasons)
8 states (the seven Adityas plus the 8th suurya as *the* Aditya)
13 states (the 12 months of Lunar calendar plus 1 month added for sync with
Solar calendar)

Further  (and this is my opinion, I do not have any "proofs" at present) my
observation is
that really Vasus and the "old" Adityas are the same, or talk about the same
basic phenomena.
I can clarify further after a few days, when I am armed with some references
:-)

Your count of 33 canonical devatas is, of course, correct.
I hope this helps.
With best wishes,
-- Himanshu

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

