+++
title = "133 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-April/045023.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-April/045023.html)

> Slowly he changed due to the effect of Maha Periyava who weaned him from
​> ​
useless rationalism.
R
​eason is a faculty which a man developed in the course of evolution.
It has srved and is serving him well. Reasoning is behind the spectacular
advanced of humanity.
Realising this Sankara tried through his bhashyas to establish advaita
rationally.
All of us on this list strive to present advaita on a rational basis.​
If not the volume of material passing through this list is a waste.


regards,
Sarma.

On Mon, Apr 17, 2017 at 12:14 AM, V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> [17/04, 00:10] V Subrahmanian: Noted lyricist Kannadasan visited Kanchi
> Maha Periyava and as usual they discussed Aaanmigam. Kannadasan was earlier
> an atheist and wrote articles criticizing religion.
>
> Slowly he changed due to the effect of Maha Periyava who weaned him from
> useless rationalism. But the basic nature of criticism still Continued.
>
> He asked Maha Periyava when milk is White then how come the Parkadal is
> shown as Megavarnam? Has the colour of Mahavishnu dissolved in the ocean of
> milk.
>
> Acharyal gave a smile. He just said ‘Enjoy you will get the reply by noon’.
>
> Kannadasan was perplexed. He dare not sat anything. Vummidi Bangaru Chetty
> visited the Sri Matham that afternoon. Both Kannadasan and Vummidiyar
> belonged to the same Chettiar community and greeted each other in their
> traditional way. Afterwards Vummidiyar placed a Large Green Emerald at the
> Acharyal’s feet pleading him to accept . The sage had no discrimination for
> a gem and a monolithic rock.
> He asked the staff member of the mutt to bring milk in a vessel. After it
> was brought he asked Vummidiyar to immerse the emerald in milk.
> Now this was a shock to the Jeweller. This is the process used to check the
> genuineness of emerald in his field.
>
> Did the Kanchi seer suspected his intentions or the gem. Silently he did.
> Acharyal then Called Kannadasan to see. Kannadasan  was shocked. The milk
> turned pale green and a tinge of light emanated from the Emerald immersed
> in milk.
>
> Kannadasan was speechless. How did this happen? The Acharyal explained the
> reason in a scientific way about the change of colour and drew parallel
> with Parkadal “When Parandaaman is lying in the parkadal,he too emits such
> radiance. Hence it is Megavarnam’.
>
> Tears filled Kannadasan who then immediately composed the famous song
> ‘Tiruparkadalil pallikondar Sriman Narayana……….’
>
> As for Vummidiyar, Acharyal Blessed him requesting him to take the Emerald
> to the Varadaraja perumal kovil and make a Magudam for the Perumal’.
>
> He too wept for his ignorance that he had felt humiliated earlier when
> Acharyal told him to immerse the emerald in milk. It was not to test the
> Genuineness of the Gem.
>
> It was the greatness of this Gnana Guru to drive away ignorance and guide
> people.
>
> Jaya Jaya Sankara Hara Hara Sankara!
>
> Share this:
> [17/04, 00:10] V Subrahmanian: Very interesting. Shankaracharya, in his
> commentary to the Brihadaranyaka Upanishat 4.3.7 says: यथा वा मरकतादिर्मणिः
> क्षीरादिद्रव्ये प्रक्षिप्तः परीक्षणाय, आत्मच्छायामेव तत् क्षीरादिद्रव्यं
> करोति,   [Just as a gem such as marakata, when immersed in milk, etc., for
> testing, makes the milk, etc. appear hued by its own color..]
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
