+++
title = "06 nanda chandran"
date = "2003-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-April/004677.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-April/004677.html)

354. In that one inseparable self, thou, I and all these imaginations
come only from the DEFEAT OF THE INTELLECT. In samaadhi again that intellect
becomes one with the supreme and loses its impurities. So the changes of
thou, I and all vanish from ones knowing the real nature of external
things and the Self.

355. Peaceful, quiet, controlled, one who has given up all desires and who
is full of endurance  he alone can attain samaadhi and in that samaadhi
feel the oneness with all. By that feeling of oneness with all, he does away
with the darkness that comes from ignorance and its results  fear etc. It
(samaadhi) burns all and being Brahman, he remains at peace, free from all
imaginations and actions.

356. So those who are engaged in samaadhi, they alone, by reducing the
externals (the senses, thought, ego and all) in consciousness being free
from the bondage of birth and death, attain the supreme bliss  not those
who only talk of the atman.

360. So very, very subtle is the truth of the paramaatman, that nobody can
see that with the naked eye (gross intellect). Therefore with keen
perception and only in samaadhi can I be known by a great and very pure
intellect.

362. The habit of meditation must be practiced without any break. When the
matured mind is absorbed in Brahman, then comes samaadhi, the state that is
free from all doubts. And then naturally one becomes the enjoyer of eternal
bliss.


_________________________________________________________________
The new MSN 8: smart spam protection and 2 months FREE*
http://join.msn.com/?page=features/junkmail

