+++
title = "170 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2009-08-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022246.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022246.html)

Nmaste Michael:

The quotation was from Saayanaachaarya.

There is famous saying about Vedantin's as well,

adhiitya caturo vedaandharmashaatraaNyanekashaH |
brahmatattvaM na jaanaati drvii paakaraM yathaaH |

Even though one gainslevels of "buddhi" does not necessarily elevate the depth withing heart, which is often referenced in veda as "hR^idispruSha" (Touched by heart) is necessary for vedentin as well. Such vedantinssubstantiate the validity of aproverb :

"kalau vedaantino bhaanti phaalgune kbaalakaa iva"

Regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Sun, 8/23/09, Michael Shepherd <michael at shepherd87.fsnet.co.uk> wrote:


From: Michael Shepherd <michael at shepherd87.fsnet.co.uk>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] shudra
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Sunday, August 23, 2009, 8:16 AM


Dr Yadu

How can you call Brahmins 'lifeless pillars' when Delhi's 50 public toilets
are all cleaned by Brahmins (I'm told..) because they're not asked to do
their real work...?

Holy shit ! That's what I call service...

Michael ;)

-----Original Message-----
From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
[mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org]On Behalf Of Dr.
Yadu Moharir
Sent: 23 August 2009 15:56
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] shudra



Namaste:

Yes, Hinduism survived but that is purely academic as Brahmin's remained as
lifeless pillars that supported the roof.

sthaaNur ayam bhaara-haaraH kilaabhuud, adhiitya veda.m navidnyaanaati
yo.artham ||. saayaNaacaarya ||.

When Mohd.. Gajhani attacked Somanath temple Brahmins recited"Mahaarudra"
and requested Shiva to open his "third" eye. The third for Shiva is
supposed to be "j~naana chakhsu" to burn ignorance. When are we going to
admit that it was the "Blind-Faith" on deities and Brahmin's that wanted to
keep their importance in the society were primarily responsible for loss of
our vedic knowledge as they remain the donkeys carryiong the weight of
sandlewood.

yathaa kharaa ca.ndana-bhaara-waahii bhaarasya vettaa na tu saurabhasya
tathaa hi vipraH shruti-shaastra-puuraaNaH, dnyaanena hiinaH pashubhiH
samaanaH || Uttara giitaa ||

The number of Moron Sadhu's visiting US are hiding behind the the term
"shaddhaa" and propagate Mysticism to line their own pockets for profit.

I have absolute no regard to the folks who promote recitation instead of
understanding.

We rather remain slaves than become Gods and create heaven on this Earth.
The concept for preferroing to remain "daasa" is clearly found in R^igveda
as we want someone (deities)else to make us rich by remaining "daasa"
(shuudra).

araM daaso na miiLhuShe karaaNy ahaM devaaya bhuurNaye .anaagaaH |
acetayad acito devo aryo gR^itsaM raaye kavitaro junaati || R^igveda 7-86-7
||

puru tvaa daashvaan voce .arir agne tava svid aa |
todasyeva sharaNa aa mahasya || R^igveda 1-150-1 ||


The latest fashion is that Sanskrit is great for Computers, but does anyone
seriously think whether programmers are ever going to learn Sanskrit before
programming ? This is just a feel good thing !? So much for Brahmin's.

I know all of us though born in Brahman families and have undergone
upanayana samskaraara, did sandhyaavadanama,doclean toilets in USneed to
be classified as"shudra" !!

Regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Sat, 8/22/09, Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
wrote:


From: Sunil Bhattacharjya <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] shudra
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Saturday, August 22, 2009, 11:53 PM


How about the scholars opinion that Hinduism survived the onslaught of the
Muslim invasions and rule because of the Brahmins?

--- On Sat, 8/22/09, Anbu sivam2 <anbesivam2 at gmail.com> wrote:


From: Anbu sivam2 <anbesivam2 at gmail.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] shudra
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Saturday, August 22, 2009, 8:15 PM


It means you ought to study the impact of Buddhism instead of being biased
in its favour!
If a condition in India gave rise to Buddhism, then there are two resulting
situations considering that Buddhism declined in India.

One is that the need gets fulfilled and Buddhism served its purpose. Did
it?

The other is like a condition that gives rise to the weed in a field which
condition gets rectified and the weeds are out. Here Buddhism is compared
to the weed.

You have to determine which one of this was the result.

Under Buddhism the role of Brahmins as an entity was unneeded as much as it
is under Hinduism. When something is not needed it will not exist.





_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org





_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org





