+++
title = "101 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-10-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047200.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047200.html)

Bhaskarji,
You have brought out the duplicity of these sanataniists
Rama's action in killing Sambuka was justified because he
was doing some thing against yugadharma , namely , sudra doing tapas,
when only brahmanas and kshatriyas were permitted to do tapas in treta yuga.
It is said that in Kali yuga sudras are permitted to do tapas.
Now when the members of these communities take sannyasa or do tapas
why do you not treat them with respect.

So we continue to hanker for situation in krita yuga which does not exist
and to which we are not likely to revert to.This is due to the selfish
interests of those
who govern the orthodoxy.

By dharma what sanatanists  mean is not the common normal dharma like
satya, ahimsa etc.,
but the ritualistic dharma.

By hankering for that, religous leadership is making itself irrelavent
to modern society and hence is being rightly ignored.

regards,
Sarma.

On Wed, Oct 11, 2017 at 5:56 PM, Bhaskar YR via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> but they downplay varna and believe in Veda Adhikara for all, etc.
>
> praNAms
> Hare Krishna
>
> Veda adhikAra has been denied to non-dvija-s and stree, that is the
> traditional stand which has the stamp of bhAshyakAra also.  And traditional
> mutts dare not to deviate from this injunction.  Other neo-advaitic and
> other institutions hardly care !!! Few years back I was talking to a very
> knowledgeable 'vaishya saNyAsi' at kAryAlaya, during the discussion, he
> made a passing comment that there is no entry as a participant  in the
> vidvat sadas (vAkyArtha sabha) for the sanyasi-s and scholars other than
> brAhmaNa community !!  I don’t know the existing practice with regard to
> this at traditional mutts.  Would like to hear more on this issue.
>
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
> bhaskar
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
