+++
title = "118 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-10-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047147.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047147.html)

According to Hindu Varnasrama dharma sanyasa is also an asrama with its own
vidhis and nishedhas(do's and dont's)'
When Adi Sankara tried to perform funeral of his mother, local brahmins
objected to it on the basis of that  varnasrama dharma.
Adi Sankara invoked his atyasrami status and performed the funeral

Hindu orthodoxy has never completely made peace with atyasramis because
they break the vyvastha status quo.
It continues to have tiffs with atyasramis like Bhagavan Buddha, Sri Ramana
Maharshi, Saibaba.
That is why I say orthodoxy pays lip service to advaita . We are
prachchanna  purva mimasakas under the mask of
advaita.

By the way common people adore the atyasramis irrespective of their
religion ignoring the admonitions
of the orthodoxy.

न मे पार्थास्ति कर्तव्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु किञ्चन
That is an atyasrami speaking. He may follow status quo by his own volition
but *he is free to *
*and may break it* if wishes to do so.


regards,
Sarma.

On Mon, Oct 9, 2017 at 7:04 AM, S Jayanarayanan via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> There are four possible Karmic effects to chanting the Gayatri Mantra
> outside of the geographical location of Bharata:
>
> 1) Merit (Punya) only
> 2) Mixture of Sin (Paapa) and Merit
> 3) Neither Merit nor Sin (i.e. neutral)
> 4) Sin only
>
> It is highly unlikely that #4 is true, since the command of performing the
> daily Sandhya will become totally void. The worst-case scenario is #2 - a
> mixture of Merit (performing Sandhya) and Sin (reciting Gayatri Mantra
> outside of India).
>
> There is one way to absolve oneself of Sin: the Vedic chanting of Rudram,
> especially during Pradosham or Maha-Shivaratri, preferably after taking a
> Bath and keeping one's body and mind clean. Rudra is not an ordinary Deva,
> but is Devaadi-Deva or Maha-Deva! If there is any sin in one's lack of
> performance of any Karmas, there is Saving Grace from the Supreme. But the
> Shiva Purana does exhort one to take a bath and keep one's mind clean
> before praying to Shiva.
>
> Regards,
> Kartik
>
>
>       From: Santosh Rao via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> >
>  To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
> vedanta.org>
> Cc: Santosh Rao <itswhateva at gmail.com>
>  Sent: Thursday, September 28, 2017 9:12 AM
>  Subject: [Advaita-l] Chanting Gayatri overseas
>
> Namaskara,
>
> I was recently advised that chanting Gayatri outside of India is not
> proper. Is there a basis for this, even for those born overseas? How would
> this affect duties such as sandhyavandanam?
>
> Thank you,
>
> Santosh
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
