+++
title = "65 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-10-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047113.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047113.html)

Sastras are equivocal about dharma. That is why, even after saying
that sastras are the pnly source of dharma, the discussion continues.
Some people see red when somebody tries to  bring sistachara as source
of dharma.  They either try to make it subservient to sastra
or try to make it synonymous to sastra. For them sistachara's
authority derives from the fact sistas follow dharma as prescribed by
the sastras.
If that is the case, if one asks why should Upanishad mention the list
of qualities

ब्राह्मणाः संमर्शिनः युक्ता आयुक्ताः अलूक्षा धर्मकामा स्युः

there is no answer. Do not these qualities somehow contribute to their
achara being pramana for dharma?


regards,
Sarma.


On Sat, Oct 7, 2017 at 6:24 PM, Sujal Upadhyay via Advaita-l
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> Namaste,
>
> I too understand what you say. We all understand.
> I too have greatly benefited from this list, but this is one topic pinches
> us.
> I cant just quote that shastras say this and that and then also appreciate
> the work done by western Hindus. This is hypocrisy. Every time quoting
> shastras is not going to work. If we stretch too much, then we would not be
> in a position to apply shastras in our practical life. 100 % cannot be
> applied. Too much compliance will result into increase in resistance of
> masses, it will result in alienation by those who are practicing it. Also
> we cannot disregard shastras.
>
> That is why I have said when Sringeri Matha takes some steps like
> establishing matha in USA and Canada, they must have a strong reason for it.
>
> Without piling up layers any further, my simple question is what is the way
> forward?
>
> OM
> Sujal
>
>
> On Sat, Oct 7, 2017 at 6:13 PM, Santosh Rao via Advaita-l <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
>> I understand, I myself have emailed Sri Jaldhar directly with personal
>> questions because I value his opinions greatly. For the past 3 years this
>> list has been one of my "go to's" for shastric knowledge. But the fact that
>> I have to come to the obscure ends of the internet in order to read
>> traditional views and discussions regarding vedanta is demonstrative about
>> what I am saying.
>>
>> I don't particularly favor the view that duties like SV and chanting
>> Gayatri should be forsaken overseas, but at the same time I don't find the
>> excuses made for disregarding clear statements in shruti very satisfying.
>> I'm sorry if I offended anyone, it wasn't my intention
>>
>>
>> Namaskara,
>>
>> Santosh
>>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
