+++
title = "224 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2011-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/027983.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/027983.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Just now, off the list one of the readers (who wants to maintain anonymity 
) sent the below copy & paste commentary from Swamy Gambhirananda...He 
said he took it from some web site. And I dont know how authentic it is !! 
  The commentary in English is self explanatory.  To our interest swamiji 
puts the word 'divine' in brackets to show us that tAmasika pooja involves 
even 'divine' form of mother(s) !!??  I dont know how his comments 
validated in advaita circle as I am not much aware of his works.  Would 
prabhuji-s of this list like to comment on it please?? 

// quote //
Deva-vratah, votaries of the gods, those whose religious observances 
[Making offerings and presents, circumambulation, bowing down, etc.] and 
devotion are directed to the gods; yanti, reach, go to; devan, the gods. 
Pitr-vratah, the votaries of the manes, those who are occupied with such 
rites as obsequies etc., who are devoted to the manes; go pitrn, to the 
manes such as Agnisvatta and others. Bhutejyah, the Beings such as 
Vinayaka, the group of Sixteen (divine) Mothers, the Four Sisters, and 
others. And madyajinah, those who worship Me, those who are given to 
worshipping Me, the devotees of Visnu; reach mam, Me alone. Although the 
effort (involved) is the same, still owing to ingorance they do not 
worship Me exclusively. Thereby they attain lesser results. This is the 
meaning. 'Not only do My devotees get the everlasting result in the form 
of non-return (to this world), but My worship also is easy.

//unquote//



Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
