+++
title = "192 D.V.N. Sarma"
date = "2010-11-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025926.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025926.html)

I heard a story that Vidyaranya ,Vedanta Desika and Akshobhya muni were
classmates in Kanchi

regards,
Sarma.

On Mon, Nov 15, 2010 at 12:54 PM, Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>wrote:

> On Sun, 14 Nov 2010, Sunil Bhattacharjya wrote:
>
>  Thank you for this clarification. I understand that before leaving for
>> kanchi he Madhava (senior) had another Guru, who sent Madhava (senior) to
>> Kanchi and as Kanchi was a seat of knowledge for both he Advaita and the
>> Ramanuja schools at that time, both these stalwarts, Madhava (senior) and
>> Vedantadeshika might have come into contact at kanci, despite belonging to
>> different schools and they had friendsip with  and respect  for each other.
>>
>
> It seems rather dubious to me but as I have not looked into the subject
> deeply I won't comment further.
>
>
>
>  It appears  it was Madhava (senior) and not the other Madhava,  who was
>> the adviser (and also called the minister, as the ministers had the advosry
>> roles) to Hukka and Bukka.
>>
>>
> No although this family were connected to the Vijayanagar court, Madhava
> Mantri is yet another person all together.  He is the author of the
> commentary on the Suta Samhita which is often wrongly ascribed to one of the
> other Madhavas or Vidyaranya.  But Madhava Mantri belonged to Angirasa gotra
> whereas the other Madhavas belong to Bharadvaja gotra.
>
> --
> Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>

