+++
title = "280 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-10-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043297.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043297.html)

Are we sure that Anu Gita is not an interpolation.
regards,
Sarma.


On Sat, Oct 29, 2016 at 8:20 AM, Sunil Bhattacharjya via Advaita-l
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> Dear Shashwata Shastriji,
>
> I never said that the Lord expressed his inability to be yoga-yukta. He took the avatara for a divine purpose and not to be yoga-yukta at anytime at the call of Arjuna, whom the Lord rebuked for forgetting all that he had been taught. Further, the Lord very well knew that Vedavyasa would propagate to the world what all the Lord taught to Arjuna.
>
> I am neither speak for the Lord nor can claim that I understand all his maya. I just expressed what I understood as to why the Lord did not repeat the Gita discourse. Lord has his own way of working. Vedavyasa told that the Lord could have averted the curse of Gandhari if he wanted to  and protected the Yadus from getting destroyed, but he did not do that.
>
> Regards,
> Sunil KB
> --------------------------------------------
> On Fri, 10/28/16, Shashwata Shastri <shashwata.unimas at gmail.com> wrote:
>
>  Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Why did Krishna said that he was unable to repeat Gita?
>  To: "Sunil Bhattacharjya" <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>, "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>  Date: Friday, October 28, 2016, 6:53 PM
>
>  Pranam
>  Sunil ji,
>
>  Svayam Bhagwan
>  is unable to achieve yoga-yukta state again? That
>  doesn't sound right. Who has subjugated yoga-maya, who
>  is by born jivanmukta he has issues while acquiring youga
>  yukta state? Isn't there a mystery behind it?
>
>  Best Regards,
>
>
>  Shashwata Chowdhury
>
>  On Thu, Oct 27, 2016 at
>  9:45 PM, Sunil Bhattacharjya via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>  wrote:
>  Namaste
>  Praveenji,
>
>
>
>  The Lord also said that he delivered the discourse in
>  Yoga-yukta state.
>
>
>
>  Kind regards,
>
>
>
>  ------------------------------ --------------
>
>  On Thu, 10/27/16, Praveen R.
>  Bhat <bhatpraveen at gmail.com>
>  wrote:
>
>
>
>   Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Why did Krishna said that he was
>  unable to repeat Gita?
>
>   To: "Sunil Bhattacharjya" <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com
>  >, "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
>  <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
>  vedanta.org>
>
>   Date: Thursday, October 27, 2016, 2:10 AM
>
>
>
>   Namaste Sunilji,
>
>
>
>
>
>   On Thu, Oct 27, 2016 at
>
>   11:06 AM, Sunil Bhattacharjya via
>  Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
>  vedanta.org>
>
>   wrote:
>
>   Lord Krishna did not
>
>   forget Gita. How cam he? Please do not go by the
>  translation
>
>   and better read what the Lord said to Arjuna as given in
>  the
>
>   Sanskrit verses.
>
>
>
>
>
>   The relevant
>
>   part of the verse reads so in Sanskrit: न च
>
>   साऽद्य पुनर्भूयः
>
>   स्मृतिर्मे
>
>   सम्भविष्यति । The explanation
>  may
>
>   not have been given, but the translation is not
>  incorrect,
>
>   since it literally reads as: "And now, that
>
>   recollection of mine [regarding the narration] is not
>
>   possible".
>
>
>
>   Kind rgds,
>
>   --Praveen R. Bhat
>
>   /* Through
>
>   what should one know That owing to which all this is
>  known!
>
>   [Br.Up. 4.5.15] */
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>  ______________________________
>  _________________
>
>  Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.
>  org/archives/advaita-l/
>
>  http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.
>  culture.religion.advaita
>
>
>
>  To unsubscribe or change your options:
>
>  http://lists.advaita-vedanta.
>  org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
>
>
>  For assistance, contact:
>
>  listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
