+++
title = "153 S.N. Sastri"
date = "2005-12-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-December/015486.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-December/015486.html)

Re; Question from Shri Krunal Makwana re-yajna

Yajna (sacrifice) is a ritual laid down in the karma kANDa of the Vedas.
Various yajnas are prescribed for attaining wealth, progeny, heaven, etc.
The ritual is a very elaborate one, lasting over several days. 16 priests
belonging to the three Vedas officiate in a yajna. Oblations are poured into
the sacrificial fire with the chanting of mantras.

Soma is a plant. The juice obtained by crushing the leaves of this plant is
poured as an oblation into the fire. Yajnas are being conducted even now in
some places in South India as well as North India.

ASvamedha yAga can be conducted only by kshatriya kings. This is not
conducted anywhere now. This was done by a king for asserting his lordship
over other rulers. A horse would be sent round neighbouring
countries. Any ruler who captures the horse has to fight with the ruler who
 sent the horse if he wants to retain his independence.  This used to be
done in ancient times. King Dasaratha is said have performed this in Valmiki
Ramayana.

S.N.Sastri



On 12/23/05, advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org <
advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
> Send Advaita-l mailing list submissions to
>        advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>
> To subscribe or unsubscribe via the World Wide Web, visit
>        http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> or, via email, send a message with subject or body 'help' to
>        advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>
> You can reach the person managing the list at
>        advaita-l-owner at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>
> When replying, please edit your Subject line so it is more specific
> than "Re: Contents of Advaita-l digest..."
>
>
> Today's Topics:
>
>   1. What is Rashtreeya Maraga tradition? (Prasad Ramamurthy Kadambi)
>   2. MahA yajnas (Krunal Makwana)
>
>
> ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Message: 1
> Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 19:23:33 +0530
> From: Prasad Ramamurthy Kadambi <kaupeenavanta at gmail.com>
> Subject: [Advaita-l] What is Rashtreeya Maraga tradition?
> To: Advaita vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> Message-ID:
>        <3fc81fd0512230553n1f522c90n116aaa72fd100d65 at mail.gmail.com>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
>
> Namaste,
>
> I remember reading somewhere about Rashtreeya Marga, a tradition  that was
> started by Madhava Vidyaranya of Vijayanagara fame and recently I noticed
> that Smt. Padma Subramaniam was instrumental in reviving that tradition,
> what is this tradition all about?
>
> Regards
>
> Prasad Kadambi
>
> --
> sada shiva samarambham Shankaracharya madhyamam !
>
> asmadacharya paryantham vande gru paramparam !!
>
>
> ------------------------------
>
> Message: 2
> Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2005 14:57:19 +0000
> From: "Krunal Makwana" <krunalmakwana at hotmail.com>
> Subject: [Advaita-l] MahA yajnas
> To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org,
>        advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org, jaldhar at braincells.com
> Message-ID: <BAY102-F3154835B1F07BE09F49D66BE330 at phx.gbl>
> Content-Type: text/plain; format=flowed
>
> || Namo Narayan ||
>
> Dear Jaldharji,
>
> I have been hearing various people 'talk' about yajnas but when they are
> asked what is the true meaning behind the yajnas, they change the subject
> or
> they don't know.
>
> Can i ask yourself and the rest of the scholars on the advaita post to
> give
> a brief on:
>
> Soma Yajna: What are the ingredients on this yajna? What is Soma, is it a
> plant, an animal? Who performs them? Why is a Soma Yajna performed? Is it
> performed to this day?
>
> Ashvamedha Yajna: What are the ingredients? Is a horse really used, and if
> it is used, what is it used for? Who performs the yajna? Why is is
> performed? Is it performed today?
>
> Shishyaste'ham,
>
> Krunal Makwana
>
> _________________________________________________________________
> Are you using the latest version of MSN Messenger? Download MSN Messenger
> 7.5 today! http://messenger.msn.co.uk
>
>
>
> ------------------------------
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
>
> End of Advaita-l Digest, Vol 32, Issue 22
> *****************************************
>

