+++
title = "88 yogafarm"
date = "2002-09-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-September/003685.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-September/003685.html)

Namaste, Jagannathji & group -- thank you for the enlightening remarks.
I, too, always found it curious that Shankarachryaji was so deeply
involved in religious rituals.

In our Neti Yoga classes, we focused on the "accidental samadhi"
experience (our so-called "no-mind experience") as our pathway to
Enlightenment.  This is an experience which everyone has had -- bouts of
"lost time" which, for most people, prove disturbing or perplexing; but
which, if understood for what they are, can lead to immediate
Enlightenment.

It is my contention that ANY period of "lost time" or "involuntary
samadhi" can have the same effect as years of meditation -- in terms of
its power to bring understanding of one's Divine Core of Pure
Consciousness (Brahman, Atman).

Even if a merely curious seeker has a teacher or guru who understands
the meaning of this universal experience, it is simply a matter of
explaining it to the student.  Then Enlightenment -- though not
necessarily "liberation" -- is immediately achieved.

That bout of "lost time" can occur via a "noble" means -- e.g., dharana
> dhyana > samadhi -- or by a very mundane route ... such as
intoxication, hypnosis, coma, rapture, driving for too many hours or,
possibly, even UFO abduction.

But the result of this involuntary samadhi is the same as for the
intentional variety: The brief but undeniable loss of mind / maya.  Loss
of ego / ahamkara.  Merging with Oneness.  Tat twam asi.

Indeed, infants appear to be in this "no-mind state" for many hours of
each day, as do setting hens, etc.  The difference between them, and the
Enlightened One, is merely that of knowledge and understanding of the
experience.

It is my feeling that we make too much of "spirituality."  We are each
(illusory) Aspects of the One.  All that separates the spiritually-aware
person from the worldly person is intent ... if either of them actually
exists, at all.  Again, thanks for the wise remarks -- be well and
namaste ... Michael

Michael Blate
Executive Director

Welcome to DeerHaven Hills Farm and Yoga Eco-Center!  Learn more about
us at www.yogafarm.com ...

Then learn how to heal yourself or your loved ones, using only the touch
of your finger -- www.g-jo.com ...

Or discover the awesome transformative power of Neti Yoga by visiting
http://community.webtv.net/yogafarm/NetiYoga

