+++
title = "123 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-06-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024722.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024722.html)

OM shrii shankaraachAryavaryaaya namaH

We continue with the series.

18. prakR^itirnaama pUrvakR^itadharmaadharmaadisaMskaaraaH
vartamaanajanmaadau abhivyaktaaH || 3.33 ||


##Nature means the impressions of virtue, vice etc. acquired in the
past (lives) and which become manifest at the commencement of the
present life.##

19. yadi sarvaH jantuH aatmanaH prakR^itisadR^ishameva cheshhTate\, na
cha prakR^itishUnyaH kashchit.h asti\, tataH purushhakaarasya
vishhayaanupapatteH shaastraanarthakyapraptau idamuchyate || 3.33 ||



##If all beings behave only according to their own nature -- and there
is none without nature -- then, since there arises the contingency of
the scriptures becoming purposeless owing to the absense of any scope
for personal effort, therefore the following is stated [Verse 3.34:
indriyasyendriyasyaarthe ...]##

20. yadaa punaH raagadveshhau tatpratipaxeNa niyamayati tadaa
shaastradR^ishhTireva purushhaH bhavati\, na prakR^itivashaH || 3.34
||

##On the other hand, when a person controls love and hatred with the
help of their opposites, then he becomes mindful only of scriptural
teachings; he ceases to be led by his nature;##


21. kaamo hi udbhUtaH rajaH pravartayan.h purushhaM pravartayati ##'##
tR^ishhNayaa hi ahaM kaaritaH ##'##  iti duHkhitaanaaM rajaHkaarye
sevaadau pravR^ittaanaaM pralaapaH shrUyate || 3.37 ||


##When desire comes into being, it instigates a person by arousing
rajas.  People who are engaged in service etc. which are effects of
rajas, and who are striken with sorrow are heard to lament, "I have
been led to act by desire indeed"##

22. ##'## xipraM hi maanushhe loke ##'## iti visheshhaNaat.h
anyeshhvapi karmaphalasiddhiM darshayati bhagavaan.h || 4.12 ||

##By the specific statement, "For, in the human world, success comes
quickly", the Lord shows that results of actions can accrue even in
the other worlds.##


(To be continued.)
Ramakrishna

