+++
title = "86 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024666.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024666.html)

OM shrii shankaraachaarya varyaaya namaH, OM brahmaananda pradaayakaaya namaH
OM shrii gurubho namaH

We continue with the series of selected drops of nectar from
bhagavadpaadaa's gItA bhaashhya, which being an ocean of nectar,  is
capable of quenching the shoka-moha of the seeker tormented by
saMsaaara, ultimately giving shreas.

The selection is done by mahAmahopAdhyAya Shri Pullela
ShriRamachandrudu gaaru (Shri Pullela Shri Ramachandrudu gaaru)

12. sarvatraiva hi adhyaatmashaastre kR^itaarthalaxaNaani yaani
taanyeva saadhanaani upadishyante\, yatnasaadhyatvaat.h |  yaani
yatnasaadhyaani saadhanaani laxaNaani cha bhavanti taani || 2 . 54||


##For in all scriptures without exception, dealing with spirituality,
whatever are the characteristics of the man of realization are
themselves presented as the disciplines for an aspirant, because these
(characteristics) are the result of effort. And those that are
disciplines requiring effort, they become the characteristics (of the
man of realization). ##


13. taavadeva hi purushhaH yaavadantaHkaraNaM tadiiyaM kaaryaakaarya\-
vishhayavivekayogyam.h |  tadayogyatve nashhTa eva purushho bhavati ||
2.63 ||


##Indeed, a man continues to be himself so long as his mind remains
fit to distinguish between what he ought to and ought not to do. When
it becomes unfit, a man is verily ruined.##


14. moxasya cha akaaryatvaat.h mumuxoH karmaanarthakyam.h || 3.1 ||

##As Liberation is not a result (of action), actions become useless
for one aspiring for Liberation.##


15. yadi vihitaakaraNaat asaMbhaavyamapi pratyavaayaM bruuyaat.h
vedaH\, tadaa anarthakaraH vedaH apramaaNamityuktaM syaat.h\;
vihitasya karaNaakaraNayoH duHkhamaatraphalatvaat.h || 3.1 ||


##Should the Vedas speak even of the impossible, that sin accrues from
the non-performance of enjoined rites, then it will amount to saying
that the Vedas are a source of evil and hence invalid! For the result
of either doing or not doing what is enjoined would be pain.##


16. tasmaat aj~nena adhikR^itena kartavyameva karma || 3.16 ||


##Action must be undertaken by one who is qualified (for action) but
is unenlightened.##


17. praarabdhakarmaayattaH tvaM lokasaMgraham.h eva api lokasya
unmaargapravR^ittinivaaraNaM lokasaMgrahaH\, tamevaapi prayojanaM
saMpashyan kartum.h arhasi || 3.20 ||

##tvaM: you, who are under the influence of past actions; arhasi,
ought; kartum, to perform (your duties); saMpashyan api, keeping also
in view; loka-saMgrahaM, the prevention of mankind from going astray;
even that purpose.##

(To be continued.)
praNAmaH
Ramakrishna

