+++
title = "36 J.S. RAMASWAMY"
date = "2006-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-December/017955.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-December/017955.html)

Dear Sri Sethu, 
  You may try at Bhavans Pusthak Bharati, Sannadhi Street, Mylapore or Higgingbothams.

Sethu <facestudio at hotmail.com> wrote:
  Dear Sri Ramesh:

I had marked your post to follow up when in Chennai. I am trying to get my
hands on a copy the book Mutthi Neri and so far I have not had any luck -
the Matam in T Nagar and the offices of Vidya Tirtha Foundation in Gundy are
both out. Do you have any suggestions?

Warm wishes.


Sethuraman.




-----Original Message-----
From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
[mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org] On Behalf Of RAMESH
RAMANAN
Sent: Thursday, November 16, 2006 10:30 AM
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Subject: [Advaita-l] Mutthi Neri - A very good book published by
SringeriMath 

Dear Tamil members on the board, 

I have found the book "Mutthi Neri" in Tamil published by Shringeri Math
in Tamil, containing various important discourses of Sri Abhinava
Vidyatheertha Mahaswami to be a very good and useful one. I consider this to
be the best book out of the more than thousand books that I have ever read
on philosophy and religion in my life and would DEFINITELY, WITHOUT ANY
HESITATION, urge all tamil knowing members to enjoy reading this book. At
present, an English translation of the book does not exist. 
Best wishes and Pranams, Ramesh Ramanan.



_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
Access over 1 million songs - Yahoo! Music Unlimited.

