+++
title = "70 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-10-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043009.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043009.html)

Namaste Sri Sujal Ji,



Reg  << So the below statement is not a bhashya, but your understanding
based on bhashya,

*The succinct answer is << Because the “anubhava”is advaitic (paramArthika,
pure Bliss) when the vritti assumes “brahmAkAra”. It is called “akhandAkAra
vritti”  But the event is taking place only at the vyAvahArika level. Hence
vritti continues to exist. There is no damage to advaita sidhAnta >>.



This gives me a little air to breath :) >>,



My understanding as expressed here  is not confined  to or based on VC or
the Bhashya thereon by the Jagadguru. It is just my current state of
understanding of advaita sidhanta. I really hope I am not disturbing your
tranquil state attained from your sAdhanAs.  I got the same impression from
your response to my understanding of OmkarOpAsana. You may please ignore
them if they are not in accordance with your understanding.



Reg  << Here there is an assumption that one is already abiding in nirguNa
Brahman and the mind experiences akhaNDAkAra vritti.

As I understand, the experience of akNDAkAra vritti is before entering
nirguNa sthiti. So a sAdhaka can experience akhaNDAkAra vritti, oneness
with Brahman by holding his mind still, but still, mind is not destroyed.
Hence in order to stay in samAdhi, s/he has to keep vritti-s still, whereas
the experience should be sahaja without any effort to make it still.>>,



No such assumption is made. AkhandAkAra vritti arises on hearing the
mahavAkya from the Guru  at the appropriate time and the state he attains
at that instant is also termed NS. I am not sure if you are using the term
“keep vrittis still “ in the yogic sense, meaning cessation of mental
vrittis. If yes, that is never so in advaita. The term  “ keeping vrittis
still “ if encountered in advaita always means “keeping the vrittis steady
and unchanging on Brahman “. This is my understanding.



Regards
