+++
title = "105 kuntimaddi sadananda"
date = "2002-10-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003981.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003981.html)

Sometime back when I was in India on Sabbatical, I came across an
article in Telugu and I translated it and posted it in advaitin list.
 Since the topic is concerned about the data of kaliyuga etc, I am
taking the liberty to post in this list for those who are interested,
for whatever it is worth.
Hari OM!
Sadananda
---------------------------------------------------------


                     Historicity of Mahabharat

This article is based on the information that I found in March 1995
issue of "Saptagiri" published in Telugu by Tirumala Tirupati
Devastaanam, authored by Shrii Janamaddi Hanumanta Rao. The article
itself was based on the research effort by Professor K. Srinivasa
Raghavan. The research was acclaimed by several famous pundits of
Panchanga Shaastra including the Secretary of the All India Panchanga
Samskarana Sangha, Pandit Radhashyaam Shaastri from Hariyana, and
Vice chancellor of Sourashtra University, Shrii D.R. Mankad, etc.

Based on the astrological information provided by Veda Vyaasa
(Position of the stars etc), Mahabharat war was estimated to have
started on 3067B.C. on 22nd November. On the day of the war, the
astrological positions of the Sun, Moon, Rahu, Saturn, Guru, Mangala
and Sukra planets have been described by Vyaasa. By looking at the
position based on Panchangam, Indian Calendar, and matching with the
position of the stars described by Vyaas and comparing with the
Julian Calendar, one can arrive at the precise dates for the war.
Furthermore all other related incidents that took place before and
after the war were described in Mahabhaarat, and the dates for these
can be precisely matched with the Julian calendar, as discussed
bellow.

Shrii Krishna made a last minute effort to make peace but failed. He
left the Upaplaavya city on Kaartiika Shuddha Dvaadasi day in Revati
Nakshatra (star) between 7:36 - 8:24AM. He reached Hastinaapura in
Bharani Nakshatra, and had discussions with the Kouravaas till
Pushyami Nakshatra. The day Duryodhana rejected the peace proposal
was Krishna Pancami. Krishna left Hastinaapura, and had consultations
with KarNa before he departed. (He revealed to KarNa that he was the
eldest son of Kunti) on Uttara Palghuni day. Krishna informed KarNa
that Duryodhana must get ready to fight, seventh day from that day,
which will be Amaavaasya day (New-moon day) with JyeshTa Nakshatra.
Krishna returned to Upaplaavya city on Chitta Nakshatra. Three days
after that on Anuradha Nakshatra Balarama came to Upaplaavya. Next
Pushya Nakshtra day Pandavaas left with Krishna to Kurukshetra.

Fifteen days after return from Upaplaavya city, Balarama left on
Punarvasu Nakshatra on the tour of sacred places. (Balarama did not
want to participate in the war that involved cousins on both sides).
He returned to Kurukshetra after forty-two days in the ShravaNa
Nakshatra. The war already started eighteen days back. On the
nineteenth day, BahuLa Caturdashi day on ShravaNa Nakshatra,
Duryodhana died. It was the fifty-ninth day after Amaavaasya with
JyeshTaa Nakshatra.

Krishana returned from Hastinaapura after his unsuccessful peace
mission on Uttara Palghuna day. Starting from that day, the seventh
day is New-moon day (amaavaasya) with Saturn on Rohini Nakshatra as
discussed by Vyaasa. Rahu was approaching the Sun, and the Moon was
turning towards Amaavaasya (New-Moon day).

36 years after the Mahabharat war, Yaadava kula was destroyed. This
was predicted by Krishana by astrological happening - "Rahu has
compressed
Purnima on Chaturdasi day. This happened once before the Mahabharata
war and again will be happening soon and this will lead to our
destruction".
He remembered Gandhari's curse on the Yadava kula.

Astrologically a strange phenomenon occurred during the Mahabharata
war. The lunar cycle (paksha - normally is 15 days) sometimes happens
in fourteen days. But during the Mahabharata war-time a rare thing
happened - the paksha got compressed to 13 days. (May be 13 is a bad
number). This aspect has been discussed in the Bhiishma parva - 3rd
Adhyaaya. Guru and Shani are in Vaishaaka, Moon and the Sun entered
in the same house one after the other making amaavaasya on the
Trayodasi day it self . This peculiar condensation of the thithiis
into thirteen from fifteen is a rare phenomenon as discussed by
Vyaasa in Mahabharat and has inevitably followed by mass destruction
due to war. This incident provided a direct means to establish the
precise date of Mahabharat war.

According to Julian calendar this type of planetary collusion
occurred definitely in 3076 BC in November. Vyaasa writes:

 caturdashiim panchadashiim
  bhuuta puurvamca shoodhashiim
  imaantu naabhi jaaneham
  amaavaasyaam trayodashiim
 chandra suurya bhougrastou
 ekamevam trayodashiim
 aparvaNi grahaNe tou
 prajaa sakshapaishyataH||

 " I have seen fourteen days a paksha, fifteen day completion or
extension to sixteenth day also. This amaavaasya falling on the
thirteenth day itself I have never seen before" - says Vyasa. That,
on the same month Sun and Moon eclipses falling during the missing
thithiis is a rare phenomenon, resulting in large-scale disaster to
people.

One month before, in Margashira, during Purvaashhaada Nakshatra,
armies of Pandavaas and Kouravaas have assembled on the West and the
East sides of the Hiranya river , respectively. The next day was
Navaraatri and Durga Puja day. Duryodhana was itching for the war.
That evening Duryodhana sends a word with Sekuni's son Ulaka, " We
have finished the prayer to the arms and everybody is ready - why
there is further delay in starting the war?" The next day, Margashira
Shudda Ekadashi day, in KRittika Nakshatra, the war started. Hence,
the famous Bhagavad Geeta teaching also started on that day. The war
began at 6:30 am. The date according to Julian calendar was 22nd
November, 3067B.C.

  Other notable incidences that occurred:

  Bhiishma's death:

  Maagha Shuddha AshTami day in Rohini Nakshtra in the afternoon that
58th day after the war started, Bhiishma died. ( This is the actual
death -
He actually fell in the war on the 10th day after the war started).

Sri Krishna's Birth - He was born on 3112B.C. on Friday at 11:40 PM.

 Pandavaas Birth - YudhishTara was born on August 31, 3114BC, Tuesday
(Mangala Vaaram) Shudda Panchami JyeshhTaa Nakshatra - He was 696
days elder to Krishna.

Bhiima was 347 days younger to YudhishTara. - Krishna Trayodashi,
Makha Nakshatra, and Arjuana was 303 days younger to Bhiima. Shukla
Chaturdashi Soma Vaaram (Monday) Uttara PhalguNi Nakshtra.

When Pandavaas came to Hastinaapura after the death of their father
Pandu, it was 3091BC and YudhishTara was 14years, 9 months and 11days
old.

When he was coranated by Bhiishma as a prince, YudhishTara was 20
years, 1 month and 26 days old. (November, 3094BC).

They reached Varanasi in PalguNa Shuddha AshTami RohiNi Nakshtra.

Droupadi's Swayamvaram -in 3091BC, April - to reach the Wax-house it
took 10 days for Pandavaas. They stayed there for an year. After the
burning
of the wax-house, they spent six months in the Shaalihotraa's ashram
and seven months in Ekachatra city.

The second coronation and building of Indraprasta was in November
3091BC, seven months after the marriage.

Rajasuuya yagna was performed after Arjuna's dig vijaya tour - It
took five years and six months for Arjuna.

Subhadra's marriage was in April 3084BC. Three months after that was
Khadava vana dahanam.

Abhimanyu was born in 3083BC, February.

Kaliyugam started in 3105BC, October 13th, Amaavaasya Mangala
(Tuesday)

  JyeshaTa Nakshatra - Kali was born. This was the most inauspicious
day. The next Pournima day (Full-moon day) was full eclipse of the
Moon,
October 1, 3104BC. That was the day, when the five grahaas along with
moon were in DhanishTaa Nakshatra.

 Dharmajaa's Rajasuuya - Fifteen years before the Mahabharata war was
the Rajasuuya yagna of Dharmaja. That day was amaavaasya (new-moon
day)
  JyeshTa Muula nakshtra . YudhishTara shakam started in 3082BC,
October 26th . The gambling and the banishment of Pandavaas to forest
was in
November 3081BC, Margashira shukla-Trayodashi.

Vanavaasam was 12 years and living incognito was for one year (13
lunar years + 5 lunar months + 12 days or 13 solar years plus 18
days) -

Bhiimshma calculates and declares that Dhurodhana's calculations were
wrong.

AJNaata vaasam (living incognito) began in Margashira 3069BC. Arjuna
was noticed on Margashira Krishna Navami, 3068BC.

The Great war began on 3067BC, Friday 22nd November, Margashira
shudda ekadashi Nakshatra.

The war lasted for 18 days.

Dharmaraju ruled for only 36 years.

25years later YudhishTara shaka started. (Thursday October 26th).

  Fifteen years after Dharmaja rule started, Dhutaraashtra,
Gandhaari, Vidura, Kunti and Sanjaya left for Vaanaprasta (forest
living). That year itself. Vidura performed praayopavesham.

Two years after that Dhrutaraashtra, Gandhaari and Kunti got caught
in the Forest fire and died. Sanjaya was only left.

Shrii Krishna passed away on 3031BC, April 13th Friday.

Pandavaas Maahaa Prastaanam was in 3031BC, in November.

These are the dates that matched the Indian astrological description
of the stars and the moon, and Julian Calendar predictions. There is
so much self
consistency in all the events and the descriptions that it makes one
to wonder. Based on these exact information Mahabhaarat must be Five
thousand years Old (from today) as per the historical accounting. The
analysis is extremely precise and scientific, matching the
astrological position of the Indian and the Julian Calendars.

The beauty and the scientific psychoanalysis of Bhagavad Geeta stand
out as monumental contribution by the Mahabharat period to the
mankind. Based
on the above facts the historicity of Mahabharat cannot be
questioned.

Translation by K. Sadananda

-------------------


=====
What you have is His gift to you and what you do with what you have is your gift to Him - Swami Chinmayananda.

__________________________________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Y! Web Hosting - Let the expert host your web site
http://webhosting.yahoo.com/

