+++
title = "21 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2007-08-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019150.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-August/019150.html)

---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Lakshminarayana <narayana_kl_71 at yahoo.com>

Namaste to all,

I apologize for asking a personal question, but I want to know how the 
honorable members of this list practice advaita in their day to day lives. 
I am sure many members here put karma kANDa into practice by means of 
daily rituals etc., but my interest is confined to how the honorable 
members practice the jNAna kANDa. Do you practice meditation? yoga? 
contemplation? Do you try to depersonalize yourself? Do you try to see 
everything as brahman?  Do you keep reminding yourself that jagat is 
mithya? I am especially interested in knowing how learned members like Sri 
Vidyasankar, Sri Jaldhar, Sri Sadananda, Sri Bhaskar, Sri Anand practice 
advaita. Sorry if I did not include other names, but I don't know many 
members in this list. Of course, other members are also welcome to share 
their methods of practice. (Hopefully, I am not sounding rude by asking 
such an open question).

The reason why I am asking this is because I want to find a suitable and 
consistent method to practice advaita (jNAna-yoga). Sometime back, when I 
actually tried to practice advaita by trying to depersonalize myself and 
thinking the world as mithya, I went into such a state of apathy that my 
mother thought there was something seriously wrong with me. I did not know 
how to handle the situation without reverting back to this world. How, for 
instance, should such situations be tackled? I really want to know the 
experiences of others so that I might learn something from them. Thanks a 
lot.

dhanyavAd
-Lakshminarayana


---------------------------------
Yahoo! oneSearch: Finally,  mobile search that gives answers, not web links.

