+++
title = "31 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2013-04-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-April/034501.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-April/034501.html)

Dear Venkat Sriram,

Take the so called discoveries of late Kota Venkatachalam and his admirer
late Viswanatha Satyanarayana with a pinch of salt.

The majority of historians do not support thier so called findings.and all
these people are not biased admirers of west.

India is already great. We do not require these far fetched speculations to
establish its greatness.

I am an admirer of Monier Williams. I have absolutely no reason to be
ashamed of it. I use his dictionary whenever I need

and find that it helps me. Hating him will be hypocracy.

When will our panditammanyas realise that westerners are doing tapas in
order to discover

scientific knowledge and we are sitting and passing irresponsible comments
about them


On Fri, Apr 5, 2013 at 3:42 PM, Venkata sriram P <venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>wrote:

> Namaste,
>
> May i know the reason behind your liking for Monier Williams?
>
> Indian has produced far more greater indologists & historians like Dr.Kota
> Venkatachalam Garu & Prof. SK Ramachander Rao Sir.
>
> Foreign indologists have put forth distorted chronological tables of our
> history. They have distorted entire Rajatanrangini of Kalhana for which we
> are now suffering like anything.
>
> I was studying the *History of Andhra Desa* by a foreign indologist and
> was surprised to
> see several blunders in them and fitting reply was given by one of our
> greatest telugu
> historians Prof. Kota Venkatachalam Garu.
>
> As per the foreign author, the people of Andhra were the descendants of
> mlecchAs who were once the sons of Viswamitra.  Among the 100 sons of
> Viswamitra, 50 of them became mlecchAs, chandalas, andhras, dasyus & vEda
> bAhyAs with the curse of Viswamitra.  This foreign indologist deduces that
> the descendants of one of the cursed sons of Viswamitra ie., andhra to be
> AndhrAites !!
>
> This was fittingly and very beautifully countered by Prof. Kota
> Venkatachalam Garu by saying that the word *Andhra* is already mentioned in
> our puranas.  Bali, who happened to be the descendant of Yayati had 6 sons
> and one among them is *andhra*.  The kingdom of this king is called
> *Andhra*.
>
> So, i would advice you to think twice before going for foreign indologists
> who have
> destroyed our history and done much harm than good.  Unfortunately, we are
> craving for such people only like Griffith, Wilson, Jones, Monier, Max
> Mueller etc.
>
> regs,
> sriram
>
>
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>



-- 
regards,
Sarma.

