+++
title = "50 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2004-02-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012685.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012685.html)

I went through some of the messages in the original thread.  I have a
feeling that the word j~nAna is used ambiguously in the texts, that is,
sometimes as j~nAna and sometimes as vij~nAna. It may be the cause for the
issue that how a brahma-j~nAni  need not be a mukta. May be the statements
such as "brahmavit brahmaiva bhavati" denote brahma-vij~nAna and when it
happens, the release is immediate.

My 2c.

Ravi
(according to giita bhaashhya, vij~nAna is svAnubhava yukta j~nAna)



> -----Original Message-----
> From: S Jayanarayanan [mailto:sjayana at yahoo.com]
> Sent: Wednesday, February 18, 2004 11:22 AM
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] The "Royal Way"
>
>
> I said the jIvanmukti-viveka (JMV) of svAmi vidyAraNya mentions the
> Royal Way, it comes under the second chapter.
>
> As I don't have the JMV with me anymore, I can only quote from memory:
> "First sAdhana-chatushhTaya then brahma-GYAna - this rAja mArga (Royal
> Way) is well-known. But when King Janaka heard the (ashhTaavakra or
> avadhuuta) gItA, he immediately realized Brahman. This is no doubt due
> to his former sAdhana and puNya..." And then the JMV goes on to explain
> how Janaka had to eliminate his vAsanas to attain mukti, as he did not
> have perfect sAdhana chatushhTaya.
>
> Since the JMV mentions it as "well-known", and since we already know it
> to be the first thesis of Shankara in his BSB, I presumed that it was
> the "well-known Shankaran way". Shankara himself does not use that
> phrase, as far as I know. Sorry for the misunderstanding.
>
>
> --- venkata subramanian <venkat_advaita at yahoo.com> wrote:
> > i saw in one of your postings, wherein you have said about the Royal
> > Way - of the Acharya Pada.
> >
> > Could you please give me where it is found.
> >
>
>
>


