+++
title = "13 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-07-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013238.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013238.html)

Namaste.

27.
Ekas-tatr-Asty-asangas-tadanu tad-aparo’jnAna-sindhuM
pravishhTo
vismRty-Atma-svarUpaM sa
vividha-jagad-AkAram-AbhAsam-aikshhat /
buddhyA’ntar-yAvad-aikshhad-visRjati tamasA so’pi
tAm-evam-ekaH 
tAvad-viprAs-tam-ekaM katham-api bahudhA kalpayanti
sva-vAgbhiH //

tatra : Wherein,
ekaH : one
asangaH : (remains) unattached;
tadanu : on the other hand,
tat aparaH saH : the other one,
ajnAna-sindhum pravishhTaH : falling into the ocean of
ignorance,
vismRtya : having forgotten
Atma-svarUpaM : the real nature of the Self,
Aikshhat : perceived
vividha-jagad-AkAram-AbhAsam : (multifarious – universe
–forms –reflection) the apparition of multiplicity of the
universe 
yAvat : As soon as,
buddhyA : by intellect
aikshhat : (he) viewed
antaH : inside,
tamasA visRjati : he is abandoned by mAyA
sah api tAM : and he also (abandons) Her.
EvaM ekaH : Thus there is One only.
tAvat viprAH kathamapi : However, the wise, somehow
kalpayanti : talk of 
taM ekaM : that One 
bahudhA : in various ways 
sva-vAgbhiH : by their words  -- (for purposes of
instruction, not as representing the ultimate Truth).

28. 
nAyAti pratyag-AtmA prajanana-samaye naiva yAtyanta-kAle
yat so’khaNDo’sti laingaM mana iha vishati
pravrajaty-Urdhvam-arvAk /
tat-kArshyaM sthUlatAM vA na bhajati vapushhaH kintu
samskAra-jAte 
tejo-mAtrA gRhItvA vrajati punar-ihA-yAti tais-tais-sahaiva
//

pratyag-AtmA : The Inner Self
na AyAti : neither comes 
prajanana-samaye : at the time of birth
na eva yAti : nor goes away
anta-kAle : at the time of death,
yat saH akhaNDaH asti : because it is infinite.
laingaM manaH : It is the mind (with) the subtle body
vishati : (that) enters
pravrajati Urdhvam arvAK : (and) leaves above, afterwards.
tat : It (the mind)
na bhajati : does not reproduce (in itself)
kArshhyaM sthUlatAM vA : the leanness or stoutness 
vapushhaH : of the gross body.
Kintu vrajati : But it departs
gRhItvA : taking with it
samskAra-jAte : both sets (good and evil) of tendencies
tejo-mAtrAH : and the measures of light (– namely, the five
senses of perception and the life-forces, in their subtlest
form)
punaH iha AyAti : and returns again to this world
taiH taiH saha eva : with these very appendages.

PraNAms to all students  of Adi Shankaracharya
profvk













=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

