+++
title = "19 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-07-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013250.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013250.html)

Namaste.

29.
AsIt-pUrvaM subandhur-bhRsham-avanisuroH yaH purodhAH
sanAteH 
brAhmyAt-kUTAbhichArAt sa khalu mRtimitas-tan-mano’gAt
kRtAntaM /
tad-bhRAtA shrauta-mantraiH punar-anayad-iti prAha sUktena
vedaH 
tasmAd-AtmAbhiyuktaM vrajati nanu manaH karhicin-nAntarAtmA
//

AsIt pUrvaM : There was, once
subandhuH : one ‘Subandhu’
yaH : who (was)
bhRshaM purodhAH : a venerable bhramin priest
avani-suroH sanAteH : of King Sanati
saH khalu mRtimitaH : he havind died
brAhmyAt-kUTAbhichArAt : by the deceitful incantations of
some Brahmins
tan-manaH : his mind
kRtAntam-agAt : went to(the abode of the god of) death,
tad-bhRAtA : and his brother
punaH anayat : brought it back
shrauta-mantraiH : by Vedic mantras
iti prAha sUktena VedaH : -- thus says the Veda  by a
Sukta.
tasmAt, nanu : It follows from this, indeed,  that 
AtmAbhiyuktaM manaH : the mind clinging to the Self
vrajati : goes forth 
na antarAtmA : (and) not the Inner Self,
karhicit : in any case.

30.
eko nishhkampa AtmA pracalati manasA dhAvamAnena tasmin
tishhTan-nagre’tha pashcAt na hi tam-anugataM jAnate
cakshhur-AdyAH /
yadvat pAthas-tarangaiH pracalati parito
dhAvamAnais-tad-antaH 
prAk-pashcAd-asti teshhAM pavana-samuditais-taiH
prashAntair-yathAvat //

Eko nishhkampa AtmA : The one motionless Self
pracalati : moves
dhAvamAnena manasA : with the wandering mind
tasmin tishhTan : and remaining with it 
agre atha pashcAt : now before, now behind;
cakshhur-AdyAH : The eye and other senses
na hi jAnate taM : do  not know it, however, 
tam-anugataM : as present (throughout).
yadvat pAthaH : Just as, water
pracalati : moves about
dhAvamAnaiH tarangaiH paritaH : with the rolling waves 
pavana-samuditaiH : generated by the wind
asti : (and) is
tad-antaH prAk pashcAt  teshAM: in them, before them and
behind them
taiH prashAntaiH : and when they (the waves) are still,
yathAvat : is, as it ever is.

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya
profvk


=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

