+++
title = "51 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-07-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013255.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-July/013255.html)

Namaste.

31.
ekAky-AsIt sa pUrvaM mRgayati vishhayAn-AnupUrvyA’ntarAtmA 
jAyA me syAt prajA vA dhanam-upakaraNaM karma
kurvans-tad-arthaM /
kleshaiH prANA-vasheshhaiH mahad-api manute
nAnyad-asmAd-garIyaH
tv-ekA-lAbhe’py-akRtsno mRta iva viramati
eka-hAnyA’kRtArthaH //

saH antarAtmA : That Inner Self
pUrvaM ekAkI AsIt : was, at first, by itself.
AnupUrvI vishhayAn mRgayati : Then it seeks objects of
enjoyment one after another
jAyA me syAt : “Let me have a wife
prajA vA : and children
dhanam-upakaraNaM : and wealth for support”.
tadarthaM : For their sake, (the man)
karma kurvan : doing actions
prANA-vasheshhaiH kleshaiH : taking difficulties even at
the risk of his life
mahad-api : even  though great
na manute : does not deem 
anyad : anything else
asmAd-garIyaH : to be weightier than them.
eka-alAbhe tu : Even if one of them is not gained
akRtsnaH : (he feels) incomplete
mRta iva : as if he were dead.
eka-hAnya: (So too) if one of them is lost
akRtArthaH viramati : he feels he has entirely missed his
purpose of life.


32.
nAsIt-pUrvaM na pashcAt atanu-dina-karAc-chAdako vAri-vAhaH

dRshyaH kint-vantarA’sau sthagayati sa dRshaM pashyato
nArka-bimbaM /
no cedevam vinA’rkaM jala-dhara-patalaM bhAsate tarhi
kasmAt 
tadvad-vishvaM vidhatte dRsham-atha na paraM bhAsakaM
cAlakaM svaM //

vAri-vAhaH : The cloud
atanu-dina-kara-AcchAdakaH : that hides the huge Sun
nAsIt pUrvaM : has not existed ever before
na pashcAt : nor (will exist) ever thereafter
dRshyaH kintu antaraH : but is visible during that
interval.
saH sthagayati : It obstructs
pashyataH dRshaM : the vision of the spectator
na arka-bimbaM : and not the solar orb;
tarhi evam no cet :  For if it were not so, 
kasmAt jala-dhara-paTalam bhAsate : how can  the group of
clouds be visible
vinA arkaM : without the Sun?
tadvat : In the same manner
vishvaM vidhatte dRshaM : does the  (appearance of the)
universe veil the vision
atha na paraM : but not the Supreme Self 
bhAsakaM cAlakaM svaM : which is its own illuminer and
inspirer.

praNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk








=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

