+++
title = "95 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-01-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/043928.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/043928.html)

According to some scholars the present Kamakshi temple was originally a
jain temple and the name of the Devi Dharmamba(Jinadharmamba?).
According to these scholars the original Kamakshi temple is the
Adipeetheswari temple in Kanchi. The very fact Kamakoti Peetham recognises
the present temple as Kamakshi temple shows that they are not aware of the
change.

regards,
Sarma.

On Sat, Jan 7, 2017 at 2:18 AM, Sunil Bhattacharjya via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> Dear Subbuji,
>
> Adi Shankara  wrote the Lalita-Trishati-bhshya and he visited the Kamakshi
> mandir in Kanchipuram.He advocated Samayachara and not Vamachara.
>
> As regards the Saundaryalahari, the first part called the Ananandalaharai
> (verses 1 to 41) could have been written by the Kashmir king Pravarasena
> (porbably called himself the Dravidashishu) and the second part was
> completed probably by Abhinava Shankara.
>
> Regards,
> Sunil KB
> --------------------------------------------
> On Fri, 1/6/17, V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
> vedanta.org> wrote:
>
>  Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] [advaitin] The Bhashyas of Adi Shankara
>  To: "Venkatraghavan S" <agnimile at gmail.com>, "A discussion group for
> Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>  Date: Friday, January 6, 2017, 10:36 AM
>
>  To the list of works
>  mentioned below, we may also add:
>
>  The Soundarya Lahari which was translated to
>  Tamil by Kaviraja Pandita
>  stated to be of
>  the 11 CE who mentions Shankara as the author.  Another
>  much later work 'Pulavar Puranam' while
>  recording Kaviraja's life says that
>  Shankara was a shākta practitioner, not of the
>  vāmāchāra type.
>
>  regards
>  subbu
>
>
>
>  2017-01-06 11:13 GMT+05:30 V Subrahmanian
>  <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>:
>
>  > We may also note that
>  Amalananda, the author of the Kalpataru on the
>  > Bhamati, 13CE has stated that the
>  Prapanchasara is of Bhagavatpada and
>  >
>  cited a verse from there in the Kalpataru.
>  >
>  > Madhusudana Saraswati
>  has stated in the Siddhantabindu, a commentary on
>  > the Daśaśloki that it is of Shankara.
>  >
>  > Vidyaranya in the
>  Panchadashi has acknowledged the Vākyavrtti as that of
>  > Shankara.
>  >
>  > Madhusudana Saraswati has also cited a
>  line in the Gudharthadipika from a
>  >
>  famous 'Vishnushatpadi stotram' attributed to
>  Shankara.
>  >
>  >
>  Vishveshvara Sraswati, his guru, in the Yatidharma sangraha,
>  has cited
>  > verses from the Vakyavritti
>  and the Brahmanuchintanam as those of Shankara.
>  >
>  > Based on the above it
>  looks like the several other works apart from the
>  > bhashyas are accepted in the tradition as
>  that of Shankara.
>  >
>  >
>  regards
>  > subbu
>  >
>  >
>  >
>  >
>  _______________________________________________
>  Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>  http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
>  To unsubscribe or change your
>  options:
>  http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
>  For assistance, contact:
>  listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
