+++
title = "618 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-09-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042909.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042909.html)

Pranams Sri Sadananda Ji,



The clarifications you have given are by and large in accordance with my
understanding of JMV of Swami Vidyaranya.  But there are some differences
in respect of perhaps semantics or terminology which incidentally lead to
some fundamental misunderstandings concerning results or phala as well. I
would be grateful if you can clear these issues.



Whatever I am writing here is based on my understanding of JMV . Any number
of shruti/smruti/purana/itihasa pramanas are furnished in the work. Firstly
attainment of jnana is 100% and not partial, however small the percentage
thereof maybe. But it is the nishtha or abidance in this jnana continuously
for a jnani which is a variable and increases  as the FIR improves. The FIR
(as per the explanation given by you) corresponds to manonasha and
vasanakshaya of JMV. This nishtha is what is not achieved 100% even by the
jnani at the time of attainment of jnana.



Concerning phala, attainment of jnana ensures for the sAdhaka “liberation
from embodiment” irrespective of FIR reduction or not.(This should answer
the doubt raised by Sri Venkatesh Murthy Ji). The position obtaining on the
fall of the body after death is the same whatever be the state of FIR.
There is no transmigration or rebirth once jnana is attained irrespective
of whether FIR has been reduced or not.



Then what is the benefit of reducing FIR. According to JMV, one of the
important benefits is the enjoyment of ananda(bliss)  while in the current
body itself. As the FIR improves the jnani enjoys this more and more. This
is what I understand (not based on JMV) of  the ananda mimamsa in TU and
BU. As the akAmahatatva increases (meaning improved FIR) the bliss enjoyed
by the jnani is higher, reaching at its highest level the bliss enjoyed by
Brahmaji himself.



I have not listened to Swami Paramarthananda Ji on FIR. Can you please give
a reference to it. I am not sure if I can access it though with the changed
situation now obtaining. My main  interest is in knowing whether he has
specifically stated that jnana attained is not 100% or whether he is
referring to nishtha not being 100%. Even if you can authoritatively
confirm on this point it is fine with me. Though of course I would like to
listen to his talk directly if  possible.



Pranams and Regards
