+++
title = "306 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2016-10-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043306.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-October/043306.html)

A comprehensive announcement of the Free download:

*Free download of the book “Edifying Parables” on the occasion of the
Centenary Jayanthi of His Holiness Jagadguru Sri Abhinava Vidyatheertha
Mahaswamiji*

Click here to download the e-Pub version of the book for iOS and Android
devices.

http://www.mediafire.com/file/og5c1pe89ftzqh5/Edifying-Parables.epub



Click here to download the PDF version of the book for PC.

http://www.mediafire.com/file/9d8grioceqbjabd/Edifying-Parables.pdf



Click here to download the MOBI version for Kindle.

http://www.mediafire.com/file/pbxfpb9bnx3b7cy/Edifying-Parables.mobi

How can we be at peace even in stressful situations? Why are we unhappy
even when we have wealth and comforts? Are all the events of our life
predestined? Is it possible to overcome destiny and if so, how? If God is
just, why do innocents suffer and the wicked prosper? Was Lord Rama
justified in killing Vali? How is one to firmly adhere to Dharma and also
be pragmatic and efficient? How may we effectively control our anger and
how should we deal with those ill-disposed towards us? How does an
enlightened Guru spiritually uplift his disciple? How may one avoid being
misled by pseudo-gurus? What is the benefit of Karma-yoga and how is it to
be practised? How are we to discern the Self in ourselves? How do we
comprehend the Vedantic position that the world is illusory?

Answers to these and many other such questions, as also topics such as the
subtleties of Dharma, Meditation, Samadhi and the inspiring lives of great
ones have been interestingly presented in about hundred parables by His
Holiness Jagadguru Shankaracharya Sri Abhinava Vidyatheertha Mahaswamiji of
the Sringeri Sharada Peetham. These stories have been culled from His
public discourses and personal conversations and included in this book
“Edifying Parables”. Sri Vidyatheertha Foundation offers this e-book free
of cost to all, in commemoration of the centenary of the great Acharya’s
birth.

Links for free download of other e-Books as also some short video clippings
pertaining to the Jagadguru have been included in this e-Book, “Edifying
Parables.”  Readers can navigate to these links from the “Contents” page of
the e-Book.

Om Tat Sat


>
