+++
title = "45 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2019-10-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053358.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053358.html)

There will be a Dvaita-Advaita Vakyartha sadas on Sunday, 13th Oct, 2019,
on the topic of 'JanmaadyadhikaraNam'.  Mm Sri Krishnamurthy Sastrigal and
Sri Mani Dravid Sastrigal will be participating. The location: Shakambari
Nagar Raghavendra Mutt, close to the Banashankari Amma Temple, Metro
station.  The Sadas will be starting about 9 AM.  Noon meals too would be
there. Please make it to the sadas.  Inform your friends.

The following was narrated by A. Ramaswamy, IAS Retd.  [Quoted from the
book 'The Multifaceted Jivanmukta']:
                                                                       “I
was in my teens when I chanced to attend a vidvat-sadas at Sringeri.
Realising that I could not make out anything from the scholarly debates of
the assembled paṇḍitas, I left the sadas. After the night
Candramaulīśvara-pūjā, His Holiness Sri Abhinava Vidyatirtha Mahaswaminah
sent for me and enquired why I did not sit through the sadas. I replied
that it did not make sense to me to sit in the sadas, pretending as if I
was able to grasp the import of the scholarly discussions, when, in
reality, I did not comprehend anything whatsoever. “‘No, that’s not the
right attitude,’ His Holiness corrected me. ‘It is not necessary that you
should be able to grasp everything that is discussed in the sadas. Even
mere hearing of śāstra-s will fetch you puṇya. So, it is sufficient if you
sit in a sadas and listen to the scriptural discussions. From now on, make
it a point to attend vidvat-sadas whenever you get an opportunity. Sometime
or the other you will start comprehending the import of these
scriptural discussions.’ I followed His Holiness’s advice, and, needless to
mention, I immensely benefited from it.”

I cited the experience of Sri A.Ramaswamy since I have personally
experienced the apathy of Shankaracharya followers to such events. While in
a typical sadas there will be at least some 15 Madhva scholars and easily
some 40 viewers, both men and women, it is unfortunate that not a single
smartha will be present. Such an attitude speaks a lot about our lack of
appreciation of such events.

regards
subbu
