+++
title = "244 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2016-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040858.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040858.html)

Source: Speaking Tree, TIMES, Author: Sh. B.Shankar
Dear Friends,            Shubha vasanta Navaratri ! Nishkama is not merewordlessness or idleness. It is noting but the state of experience atman, Pure spirit, uninvolved witness of passivity & activity of body-mind. When One's ego identified itself with the body and feels 'I am the body',  He becomes an actor, one who is involved in variety of works. One the other hand, if he feels that 'I am the Atman', he remains as spirit, the pure witness, this state is called nishkama or ego-less passivity of the spirit.
Practise of Nishkama karma is easier said then done. This is due to the attitude of witness does not come unless one feels detached. This happens after he understands and appreciates about what one really owns in life as well as the glories of creator. Nothing belongs to us. we came with nothing. Oxygen was provide to us and food was given to us so that our body can last some 100 years. Nature meets all our wants. It is true that the world is well-endowsd guest house, Thus we can live mutually and helping each other, according to nature's design. You can not be owner if you are not the author. The creator is the material cause of the creation in addition to the nature of efficient cause.
Creation & TIME are endless, being cyclic. The process of creation has a purpose for the diva or the individual soul which one should always tries to know. It can only help him evolve to regain his full divine nature. Human birth is so precious of 70,000 different yoni births as it is the only vehicle/instrument with enough potential to reach the goal. The only thing one should is that to change the attitude towards work. One will be successful in doing Nishkama karma when he can dwell in state of a witness in discharging life duties, with out caring for results as per kRISHNA'S GITA. One has to submit all the fruits of actions to god as prasada buddhi, graceful acceptance as prasada.
Thus it is the Bhaktithat completes the Gita's dedicated & detached work and practise of Nishkama karma lead eventually to Nishkama Siddhi, an interim stage before enlightenment.Thanks & regardsKameshDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
