+++
title = "255 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-12-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-December/048031.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-December/048031.html)

Dear Shakta Bhandhu's,                    It is said that there are two paths to Sadhana. The path of Discrimination & the path of Devotion. The first one is Discriminationi i.e Rational, it thinks & reject the things that are impermanent, net, neti, net (Not this) i.e I am not my money, I am not my body, I am not my mind....until by process of elimination, the aspirant/disciple comes to a permanent & therefore the reality exists. The path of Knowledge has a concept of the ultimate Ideal from the beginning and goes forward consciously towards it.        TheDevotion on the other hand travels forwards with FAITH, Ignorant of where he will ultimately arrive. HE ACCEPTS ALL: " YOU ARE THIS and That & also THIS. There by reminding himself that Brahman exits in all things. He does not worship the thing, but realitywithin the thing.
This is the Route adopted by the great master 'RAMAKRISHNA PARAMAHAMSA'
A literal man needing to experience everything himself, he was finding his own way, blundering through the dense undergrowth of his mind, the high altitude of his soul with unflinching faith & intense yearning he prayed to the mother of the universe for the self - realisation, surrounding himself totally to her wishes. He declares finally that " As many faiths with so many Paths".
Quite often, Ramakrishna was in his state of utter desperation , Cried out to the Mother & said:Yet another day passed in the TIME, Mother: what is lifeworth if I cannot see you??I have suffered so long. Are you just a chunk of Stone? Some times I doubt you exists.Am I a fool to believe there exists a Consciousness of which this stone is only a representation?Mother you shown yourself to otherdevotees. Why won't you show yourself to me? or IS THERE ANY DIVINE CONCIOUSNESS EXSISTS ALWAYS WITH IN ME???
Why the mother won't grant our prayers? I have been praying to you mother for quite some time.I can't go or leave this physical body without a glimpse of you Mother, I would rather die.
Finally , ' A life history ofRamakrishna Says' that The mother wallks toRamakrishna inecasty and said that my child, I am please with you, you are my Kid, let me know your wish as I amplease to grant the Boons. Ibelieve that there is nothing harm to the Land with your presence so you are my son only, come on, Let us Pray together for the welfare of Mankind.
Hevalambi Nama Samvastara, Dakshinayana,Pushya suddha Trayodashi (Bhanu vasara)WISH YOU A VERY HAPPY & PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR - 2018 as we say good bye to 2017 just now.Sri Guru Padaravindarapana MastuKameswaraDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
