+++
title = "153 Ravi"
date = "1999-07-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-July/010556.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1999-July/010556.html)

--- Gummuluru Murthy <gmurthy at MORGAN.UCS.MUN.CA> wrote:

> namaste.

> I feel sorry that Robert has found vedAnta unconvincing. May be, what
> he found unconvincing are the dogmatic arguments put forward on this
> List in favour of the vedAs. If Robert had got into a discussion with

1)  To me the more important question is whether it is accepted by the
tradition or not. What is dogmatic and what is not quite subjective. If
the views stated in favour of the veda-s are correct in the eyes of
AchArya-s shankara maTha-s then it is fine.

> List in favour of the vedAs. If Robert had got into a discussion with
> a true follower of vedAnta, he would see the wisdom contained in th

2) Who is a true a follower of vedAnta? If you ask a vishiShtAdvaitin,
he will say he is the true flag bearer. There are many internal
divisions in vedanta. Within advaita-vedanta, I would say AchArya-s of
shankara maTha-s. Again this is quite subjective. Some may not agree
with me. From what I have read (mostly from kAnchi periyava's works),
what was posted in favor of veda-s by Anand, Jaldhar and Rama to
mirrors the view of tradition. They are doing a good job of helping the
list.


> a true follower of vedAnta, he would see the wisdom contained in the
> upanishads; and would further see how effortlessly, vedAnta
> (upanishads)
> explain the Truth. He would also see how it is immaterial whether

3) It is not such a effortless process as you say. If it is so history
would not have seen so many debates between the schools of vedanta. It
is very very complex. Till date, you will find staunch
vishiShTadvaitins, dvaitins and advaitins holding on to their positions
and calling other schools either partially or completely incorrect. All
are within the framework of vedanta, the same scriptures, interpreted
so differently.



4) This is list is not for people like Robert. Millions like him roam
on the face of earth.  It was never the purpose of the list to convince
or convert people like him. It is purely God's business. This list
cannot take the place of a guru either. If one is earnest, he should
contact living mahAtma-s. I do not know whether AchArya-s shankara
maTha-s will accept everyone, and will have patience and time to deal
with many many agnostics on individual basis. Atleast, they may point
them to right teachers.


Ravi
AUM shrImAtre namaH



_________________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
Get your free @yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com

