+++
title = "112 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-06-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013228.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013228.html)

Namaste
25. 
prAg-AsId-bhAva-rUpaM tama iti tamasA gUDham-asmAd-atarkyaM

kshhirAntar-yadvad-ambho janir-iha jagato nAma-rUpAtmakasya
/
kAmAd-dhAtuH sisRkshhoH anugata-jagataH
karmabhis-sampravRttAt
reto-rUpair-manobhiH prathamam-anugataiH santataiH
kAryamANaiH //

prAk : In the beginning
tamaH AsIt : there was darkness
bhAva-rupaM : as an entity.
iti tamasA gUDhaM : Thus veiled by darkness
asmAt atarkyaM : nothing could be inferred,
yadvat kshhIrAntaH ambhaH : like the water in milk.
iha jagataH janiH : The birth of this universe
nAma-rUpAtmakasya : consisting of name and form
kAmAt : (was) by the will
dhAtuH : of the Creator
sisRkshhoH : desiring to create –
sampravRttAt :  (this itself) being induced 
karmabhiH :  by the actions 
anugata-jagataH : of a continuing universe
santataiH kAryamANaiH : ever caused or inspired by
manobhiH : minds
prathamam anugataiH : (that are) also continuous
retorUpaiH : in a germinal form.

Note 1: The original printed text that I have with me has
the  word “tantataiH”  instead of “santataiH” in the fourth
line.  I think it must be a print mistake. If some one can
find a relevant meaning for “tantataiH kAryamANaiH” I would
appreciate it.
Note 2:  In shlokas 23, 24 and 25 The Acharya rolls back in
his own mind the lines of Nasadiya sukta from the Rg Veda
and paraphrases them. The following lines are relevant to
this shloka #25: (RV: X.129. 2,3,4)
 aániid avaatáM svadháyaa tád ékaM tásmaad dhaanyán ná
paráH kíM canaása
That One Thing, breathless, breathed by its own nature:
apart from it was nothing whatsoever.
táma aasiit támasaa guuLhám ágre .apraketáM saliláM sárvam
aa idám tuchyénaabhv ápihitaM yád aásiit tápasas tán
mahinaájaayataíkam
 Darkness there was: at first concealed in darkness.  All
this was indiscriminated chaos.
All that existed then was void and formless: by the great
power of Warmth was born that Unit.
kaámas tád ágre sám avartataádhi mánaso rétaH prathamáM yád
aásiit
Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal
seed and germ of Spirit.
Note 3: Also recall from Taittiriya Upanishad: 2-6:
“so’kAmayata, bahusyAM prajAyeyeti” – He desired, Let me
become many. 

26.catvAro’syAH kapardA yuvatir-atha bhaven-nUtanA
nityam-eshhA 
mAyA vA peshalA syAd-aghaTita-ghaTanA-pATavaM yAti tasmAt /
syAd-Arambhe ghRtAsyA
shruti-bhava-yuvanAny-evam-AcchAdayantI 
tasyAm-etau suparNA-viva para-purushhau
tishhTato’rtha-pratItyA //

eshA mAyA : This mAyA --
asyAH kapardAH : Her topmost characteristics 
catvAraH : are four.
nityaM nUtanA : (She is) ever fresh
atha yuvatiH bhavet : and is therefore always young;
peshalA syAt vA : Further (she is) skilful
yasmAt : because,
yAti : (she) possesses
aghaTita-ghaTanA-pATavaM : 
(impossible-accomplishment-expertise) expertise in
accomplishing the impossible;
Arambhe ghRtAsyA syAt : in the beginning (she is)
ghee-mouthed – meaning, she tempts you at first but later
causes ruin;
evaM : accordingly
AcchAdayantI  : She veils
Shruti-bhava-yuvanAni : knowledge emanating from the Vedas.
tasyAM tishhTataH : In Her dwell,
etau suparNau iva : like two birds,
para-purushhau : the supreme Self and the individual soul,
artha-pratItyA : making the universe meaningful.

praNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya
profvk
















=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

