+++
title = "64 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-06-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013181.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-June/013181.html)

Namaste

11.
shreyaH preyashca loke dvividham-abhihitaM
kAmyam-AtyantikaM ca 
kAmyaM dukhaika-bIjaM kshhaNa-lava-virasaM tac-cikIrshhanti
mandAH /
brahmaiv-AtyantikaM yan-niratishaya-sukhasy-AspadaM
samshrayante 
tatvajnAs-tac-ca kATopanishad-abhihitaM shhaD-vidhAyAM ca
vallyAM //

loke : In the world
dvividhaM abhihitaM : there are two kinds (of goals),
namely, 
shreyaH : what is preferable
preyaH ca : and what is pleasant.
AtyantikaM ca : That which is absolute
kAmyaM : and that which is activated by desire.
kAmyaM : The desire-activated one
dukha-eka-bIjaM : is the sole source of sorrow
kshhaNa-lava-virasaM : and becomes insipid in an instant.
mandAH : The ignorant
tat cikIrshhanti : go after it.
Brahma eva : Brahman alone 
AtyantikaM : is the Absolute.
Yat AspadaM : It is the repository
niratishaya-sukhasya : of unsurpassed Bliss.
tatvajnAH : Those who know the Truth
tat samshrayante : take refuge therein.
abhihitaM : (This) is declared 
KATopanishat ca  : also (by) the Kathopanishad
shhaD-vidhAyAM vallyAM : in its six divisions (‘vallis’).

12.
AtmAmbodhes-tarango’smy-aham-iti gamane
bhAvayan-nAsanasthaH 
samvit-sUtrA-nuviddho maNir-aham-iti
vA’sm-IndriyArtha-pratItau /
dRshhTo’smy-AtmAvalokAd-iti shayana-vidhau magna
Ananda-sindhau 
antar-nishhTo mumukshhuH sa khalu tanubhRtAM yo
nayaty-evam-AyuH //

tanubhRtAM : Among all human beings
mumukshhuH : the real seeker of liberation
sa khalu yaH : is indeed he, who
antar-nishhTaH : being inwardly firm, 
AyuH nayati :  spends his whole life
evam bhAvayan : with the following attitude, (namely)
ahaM tarangaH asmi iti : that ‘I am (only) a wave
AtmAmbodheH : of the Ocean of the Self’
gamane : while going about,
ahaM  maNiH iti : that ‘I am (only) a bead
samvit-sUtrAnuviddhaH : strung on the thread of Universal
Consciousness’
AsanasthaH : while seated,
AtmAvalokAt dRshhTaH asmi iti : that ‘I am perceiving
myself through this perception of the Self’
indriyArtha-pratItau : while sense-objects are perceived, 
(and)
Ananda-sindhau magnaH : that ‘I am deep into the Ocean of
Bliss’
shayana-vidhau : while sleeping.

Note 1: This shloka is a beautifully capsuled answer to
those who like to  question: “How does an advaitin live?
What is to be practised for being an advaitin?”.

Note 2: This is the time for members to seek parallel
statements in advaitic literature. That would strengthen
our conviction in what is said.  That would also help the
‘nidhidhyAsana’ of advaitic logic and its conclusions. 

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk







=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

