+++
title = "147 Kotekal, Srinivas [Non-Employee/0200]"
date = "2003-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011536.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011536.html)



Namaste Vidyasankar-ji,

>>But in knowledge-A,  the truth may be determined at the present time,
>>but there is no guarantee that the knowledge-A will not be sublated
>>at a future time.

>Not so. The guarantee that knowledge-A is always true is determined for 
>sAkshI-A by SAstra. As sureSvara puts it, "bodhAtma-vyatirekeNa na paSyati 
>cid anvayAt". As SAstra itself puts it, "yatra tv asya sarvam AtmaivAbhUt, 
>tat kena kaM paSyet ... ..."

>So, no sublation of knowledge-A at a future time. If there is someone who 
>thinks he had brahman knowledge at some point of time, which later got 
>sublated, then the problem is merely that he has not really had pUrNa
bodha. 
>He has mistaken some vision as brahman knowledge. For those who have the 
>certitude of knowledge-A, the question of sublation at a later time does
not 
>arise.

But, as per our previous discussion on "gauDapAda kArikA-s" topic, it was
mentioned that, Advaita holds, whatever you & I perceive here (in
vyavaharika domain) is ultimately not real in paramArthika level. This
means, what we perceive here about this world and it's business
(knowledge-A) is subsequently sublated when one moves from v-level to
p-level. Don't you agree, this is what Jay is referring to "no guarantee"
knowledge-A ?

Regards,
Srinivas. 

This communication is intended solely for the use of the addressee and may
contain information that is legally privileged, confidential or exempt from
disclosure.  If you are not the intended recipient, please note that any 
dissemination, distribution, or copying of this communication is strictly 
prohibited.  Anyone who receives this message in error should notify the 
sender immediately and delete it from his or her computer.

