+++
title = "152 Kotekal, Srinivas [Non-Employee/0200]"
date = "2003-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011543.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011543.html)



>I forgot to mention the following in my earlier response. If sAkshI-A means

>the sAkshI as per advaita, then there is only one true meaning for 
>knowledge-A, i.e. the knowledge that is advaita. It is not what we perceive

>about this world and its business, for sAkshI-A already knows that all that

>is avidyA, and not real knowledge.

Well, in that case, perceptions like reading Vedas by seeing the physical
text or hearing from Guru , are all avidyA ? In that case, how do you say
one can *realize* he/she is *Brahmn* without help of these worldly
perceptions ? For that matter, isn't very School of Advaita was founded on
the basis of perception of prastanatraya ? If not, please let me know how it
was founded ? 

>It is only sAkshI-D that has a problem with no guarantee for sublation. By 
>the way, we advaitin-s do not accept your notion of sAkshI-D, because what 
>you call sAkshI-D is just another name for buddhi - the function of 
>antaHkaraNa that takes care of niScaya and vyavasAya or adhyavasAya. It is 
>buddhi that determines what is true/valid in daily experience, and that is 
>the reason it is distinguished from manas, in such instances as, mayyarpita

>manobuddhI in gItA and manomaya vs. vijnAnamaya in taittirIyopanishat. If 
>you want to claim that even advaitins need sAkshI-D, we say, we advaitins 
>have buddhi inasmuch as we operate in the daily vyavahAra, and we don't
need 
>to postulate yet another sAkshI.

I am not sure I understood this. I'll let others write on this.

>How is sAkshI in dvaita different from purusha in sAMkhya? 

Simple. With my lay understanding, purusha in sAMkhya is creator of
everything where as sAkshi-D is well aware of the fact that it is *NOT* a
creator no mater who says what.

In fact, can I ask you the same question ? Since sAkshi-A is aware of itself
as Brahmn, in that case, what exactly is the difference between sAkshi-A
(alias Brahmn) and purusha ? 

Thanks,
Srinivas.

This communication is intended solely for the use of the addressee and may
contain information that is legally privileged, confidential or exempt from
disclosure.  If you are not the intended recipient, please note that any 
dissemination, distribution, or copying of this communication is strictly 
prohibited.  Anyone who receives this message in error should notify the 
sender immediately and delete it from his or her computer.

