+++
title = "173 Rajaram Venkataramani"
date = "2012-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-July/032544.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-July/032544.html)

Dear Sri Ravi,

If you read my post, you will see that I do not at all contradict
mahaperiyava's views. Let me restate again briefly. At the time of
creation, there were four Varnas. All humans that exist belong to one of
these four Varnas. They may not follow the varna dharma and may not even
know that there is such a thing as varnashrama but they cannot lose their
ancestry. I hope you agree with this to start with. I also agree that varna
is by birth only. And it is possible to determine one's varna by jati. We
have no difference of opinion until this point. The question arises with
respect to people who do not know their jati such as those who live in the
US, UK etc. They may belong to different races but are ultimately
descendants of the same ancestors who came fom the first yajna. They are
also influenced by the three gunas - sattva, rajas and tamas. If they have
preponderance of sattva, they belong to brahmana varna and so on. It is
possible to determine that by the use of astrology. Just as we cannot ask a
man to act like a woman and vice versa, we cannot force a person to act
against his varna just because his skin colour is white, yellow or black.
The question is whether a brahmana can give this right to one who is not
his son. There is no evidence to say so. He is not changing someone's varna
but recognising it. That is all. Can we discuss further with reference to
sruti and smrti?

Best Regards
Rajaram Venkataramani

On Saturday, July 14, 2012, ravi chandrasekhara wrote:

