+++
title = "73 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-06-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000916.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000916.html)

Bhaskar Y.R. wrote:To:   ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG

> cc:    (bcc: Bhaskar YR/BAN/INABB/ABB)
> Subject:  Re: Regarding Paundraka
>
> Security Level:?         Internal
>
> Some Vaishnava Acharyas say that Paundraka represent the Mayavadi Vedantins
> who say Aham brahmaasmi without really understanding meaning of that
> Mahavakya. Some say that he represents the false Vaishnava gurus who pose to
> their devotees as Krishna incarnate.
>
> >  Dear Himanshu Prabhuji, YES, indeed you have correctly identified my purpose
> behind sending this question.  This is what exactly we have been taught by our
> ISKCON masters ( as U mentioned above).  I sincerely thank U for the efforts you
> have putin to clarify my doubts.
>
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
>
> -- Himanshu
> > bhaskar

My dear friend,
I have been reading your postings to this list for quite some time and noticed a
hint of confrontational attitude, though you are very polite. I am sure you are a
seeker of the Ultimate Truth. As a friend, can I suggest a slightly relaxed
attitude? Of course all your doubts are welcome, provided they are meant to clarify
some point about Advaita  which is bothering you.
And, have you understood the  *whole* of my last posting, especially the
interpretation of Sudarshana Chakra? My best wishes to you.

Hari Hari Hari Bol !!!   (Why not, I am Hari.)
-- Himanshu

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

