+++
title = "19 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-12-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-December/029971.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-December/029971.html)

>Perhaps you think why defend the meat eating  or  using meat in yagas when
there is  evidence.
>This is because Vedic words and sentences do give different meanings if
the root is searched and the context  is also right.So those who are >pure
vegetarians amongst us think that vedas might not be advocating meat eating
etc and do research to find out the exact saying.I think this >is not wrong
and by no means be labelled psuedointellectualism.R.**Krishnamoorthy.

Neither I defend nor condemn any thing. For me all this discussion arises
from
a set of people trying to show that certain practices were not there in the
veda
because they think these practices produce a bad image of  hinduism and
another
set of people trying to show that they were there( I belong to this set).

I  would like to point out that unless there is some absurdity, welknown
meanings of passages
should be taken and not some far fetched meanings to suit our whims and
fancies.
This is the convention propounded by Sabara Swamin the first commentator of
the
Purvamimamsa sutras.

It is meaningless to question Sankara's commentary of Bh.U. passage on the
basis some modern herbal interpretations. Sankara is not only closer to the
tradition
than we are but also more knowledgeable because of his extensive tours of
the country
and his interpretation is more valid.

Simply we cannot do away with the things we do not like from the vedas.

-- 
regards,
Sarma.

