+++
title = "150 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-11-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-November/029875.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-November/029875.html)

All these things not withstanding, except for a few areas like Kashmir and
Bengal,
the majority of brahmins of India are  strict vegetarians. Vedic
injunctions or no injunctions
there is no chance that they will revert to nonvegetarianism, ritual or
nonritual.

If Parasara-Madhviya purported to be written by the eminent Vidyaranya has
said certain vedic practices
should not be followed and people accept it, that settles it. It is
sishtachara only that prevails.
Veda and smriti are made subservient to sishtachara. Most of the arguments
of vedic supremacy
are only lip service.

-- 
regards,
Sarma.

On Sun, Nov 27, 2011 at 12:25 PM, V Subrahmanian
<v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>wrote:

> In the Brahmasutra 'अशुद्धमिति चेन्न शब्दात्’ 3.1.25 Shankaracharya has
> argued that the Veda will not be teaching something that will bring sin to
> a performer of a vedic ritual, as ordained by the Veda.  And the vedic
> injunction involving an animal is not violative of the general rule: mA
> himsyAt sarvaa bhUtAni (no being should be injured).  He has said that the
> two operate like a general rule and an exception.
>
> In the Ishopanishat bhashya Shankara has said: na vedoktam kimapi
> ananuShTheyam bhavati. [There is no injunction of the Veda that does not
> deserve to be followed.]
>
> Regards,
> subrahmanian.v
>
>
>
> 2011/11/27 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <dvnsarma at gmail.com>
>
> > What happence to the purva mimamsa position
> > tht smritis are valid so long as they do not go against sruti and
> > sishtachara is valid only as long as it does not contradict sruti
> > and valid smriti? How can smriti which prohibits gavalambham and
> > palapaitrukam be valid vis a vis sruti 's injunction?
> >
> > --
> > regards,
> > Sarma.
> >
> >
> >
> > On Sun, Nov 27, 2011 at 7:05 AM, V Subrahmanian <
> v.subrahmanian at gmail.com
> > >wrote:
> >
> > > In all these cases Shankaracharya has Himself placed  a rider in His
> own
> > > BhAshya-s.  For example in the sutra bhashya He says:  यस्मिन् देशे
> काले
> > यो
> > > धर्मो अनुष्ठीयते स एव धर्मः देशकालान्तरे अधर्मो भवति ॥ In the
> Taittiriya
> > > bhashya too this occurs in a slightly different manner for the mantra
> अथ
> > > यदि ते कर्मविचिकित्सा वा वृत्तविचिकित्स्ता वा स्यात्
> > > '[In case you have a doubt as to how you should perform a particular
> > action
> > > or as to how you should conduct in a particular situation] then the
> > > conduct/behaviour of the noble minded living in that place/time will be
> > > your guide.'
> > > Thus the interpretation of His own Bhashya-s are to be made in the
> light
> > of
> > > His own words above.
> > >
> > > Regards,
> > > subrahmanian.v
>

