+++
title = "370 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2012-03-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031355.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031355.html)

Here is a new book titled: Original Sanskrit Works of Modern Scholars from
Karnataka State.

The book is published by the Poornaprajna Samshodhana Mandiram, Bangalore
and authored by Dr.A.V.Nagasampige, Director of the institution.

This book, in English, is an enumeration  of the works in Sanskrit authored
by vidwans hailing from the Karnataka State.  More than 100 Scholars are
listed in the book along with a brief write up about each of them and the
list of works authored by them.  It is indeed a delight to go through the
book as it opens before us the rich contribution made by these scholars in
a variety of fields. They have devoted their entire lives for the study and
propagation of the Samskrita language.

Here is an excerpt from the introduction by the author of the book:

//It is needless to say that Karnataka state is not only well known for its
pleasantly moderate climate and rich cultural heritage but it is also
acclaimed for its unimaginable contribution in the field of Sanskrit. This
state shines like an ocean containing thousands of Ratnas in its depth.
Even though Sri Shankaracharya ws born in Kerala, he established the
prestigious Dakshinamnaya Peetha in Sringeri in Karnataka. Sri
Ramanujacharya also extended his academic activities in holy Melukote of
Karnataka. Sri Madhwacharya, the protector of Dvaita philosophy, was born
in Karnataka and spread the Vedic values all over the country. Many Jain
scholars like Kundkundacharya and Samanta Bhadra, creative commentators of
six philosophical systems, were born in Karnataka and are a great asset of
Karnataka.//


Names of several scholars who are amidst us now are included in the book.


This nicely brought out book is priced Rs.40 and is available at the
Samshodhana Mandiram office, Banglore. Phone: 080 266 94026.   The book
caries a benedictory message in Sanskrit from His Holiness Sri Vishwesha
Tirtha SwaminaH, the head of the Pejawar Mutt.


The book is a sure inspiration to scholars from other states of our country
to bring out such books whereby one can get to know the wealth of
contribution to Sanskrit literature in all fields by scholars of
contemporary India.


subrahmanian.v

