+++
title = "109 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2019-10-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053425.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053425.html)

Dear Members,            we celebrate Maha Kala Bhairavaashtami is a famous festival dedicated to Kala Bhairava. It is well knownasKalashtamiandKala Ashtami. It is celebratedcommonly both in the Northern and Southern states of India and observed 12times in a year according to Hindu calendar. The most significant Kalashtami isknown as Kalabhairav Jayanti, falls in the month of Margashirsha. In 2019,Kalabhairav Jayanti observes onTuesday, 19 November. Thisauspicious jayanti is also known asBhairav Ashtami.
According to thePuranas, Kala Bhairava is delineated as “Lord of Time”. He is well-known as-Kshetrapalaka, the protector of the Universe. Kala Bhairava is one of thevehement Manifestations of Lord Shiva. He portrays as a vicious deity humping aHead in one of his hands. Devotees believe that the head which God carries wasthe 5th head of Lord Brahma, chopped off by Lord Shivatocut his ego. Black Dog is the Vehicle (Vahan) on which he sits.

On thisauspicious day, Devotees worship Lord Bhairava to overcome the obstacles inlife. People also observe a strict fast for the whole day to impress him. InAditya Purana, it states the importance and the prominence of Kala bhairava.Kaal Bhairava means ‘Time’ and Bhairava is- The incarnation of Lord Shiva.Followers of Lord Shiva worship Lord Bhairava with much devotion and celebratethis festivity with a great pomp and show every year. He is a lord of time andgrant blessings to the one who value the time. Lord Bhairava is reveredespecially on Sundays, so it is believed that if Kalasthmi ever falls onSundays, it is accounted to be the divinest. The fate of idolizing LordBhairava on Kalashtami is commemorated with full enthusiasm and fervour almostin every part of the country and outside it. People take a dip to Sacred Riverson this favorable day. They listen to Shiva Kathas and recite Shloks andMantras in the name of Lord Bhairava. The Pooja-Vidhi and the TraditionalRituals of Kaal Bhairava are initiated with offering fruits, flowers and Madira(Wines/Alcohol) to him.

Ritualsconcatenated with KalaBhairava. Worshippers also visit nearby KaalbhairavaTemples to seek blessings and to pay homage to him. People also prefer to feedFood such as- Milk, Prashads and Bhogs to Black Dogs. Priests/Pandits conductvarious Pooja inside the temple premises with umpteen set of rituals. Peepsawake whole night to please Kala Bhirava.This distinguished religious day is adored by ardent devotees ofKala Bhairava to remove obstacles and hurdles from their lives.Practitioners venerate this noteworthy festival for gettingsuccess, wealth, health and prosperity. Lord Bhairava grants the protectionsand shower blessings to their beloved followers.As per the Hindu Mythology, Kala Bhairava is the God of the‘Nivaran’ of endeavors. He also rescues his worshipers from bad health andalways liberates them from accidents and mishaps.  It is said that Lord Bhairava is a guardian of the temple andtravelers. He is always being submitted the keys of the temple (in which heresides) while the priest leaves for the day. Also the travelers and touristsvenerate Lord, the time they go and visit any pilgrimage or temple.  Being the lord of the time, Godhead always advice to use thetime effectively and efficiently on the spiritual path.
The temples of Kala Bhairava such as- Sri MahaKala Bairavar Temple, Dhombaram bedu village (Tamilnadu), Bhriavababa Temple, Barhara, Rampatti,(Madhubani,Bihar) , Pracheen Shri Kaal Bhairav Mandir, near Dohla railwaycrossing, DHURI, (Punjab), Swayambho Sri Sri Sri Bhairava Swamy Temple inBhimavaram, West Godavari Dist, (Andhra Pradesh) and many more have mesmerizingidols of Kala Bhairava, made of black marbles, positioned in asanctum-sanctorum of the vicinity. Devotees pay a visit during Saturdays andKala Bhairava Asthami to witness his adorning veneration and magnetism.Sri Guru Padaravindarpana Mastu
Kameswara
