+++
title = "13 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2003-06-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011442.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-June/011442.html)

List Policies
-------------

1) Advaita-L is a open and unmoderated list. You are requested to use
self-moderation and care while you post your articles.

2) Discussions of Advaita-L center around advaita-vedanta as taught by
the Sankara sampradaaya.

3) Articles promoting bhakti within the framework of advaita-vedAnta
tradition are most welcome.

4) Discussion of nAstika philosophies such as Buddhism, Jainism, etc.,
are not allowed. But scholarly articles comparing these traditions with
advaita-vedAnta are permitted, however, you must send them to the list
moderators for prior approval.

5) Focus of the list is also NOT on the new non-dual and neo-vedanta
teachings. But, scholarly articles comparing these traditions with
advaita-vedAnta are welcome.

6) Rude and offensive postings are not allowed. When you disagree with
someone, please be polite, impersonal, objective, and to the point. If
you are offended by any message posted on the list, please contact
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org about it. We will try our best to resolve
the situation.

7) Administrators of the list reserve the final word on issues like
acceptability of posts. These decisions will be based on the list
scope. In case of doubt, knowledgeable members of the list will be
consulted.

List Moderators

(Jaldhar Vyas, Ravi Mayavaram, Vaidya Sundaram, Vidyasankar Sundaresan)




