+++
title = "117 Chandran, Nanda (NBC)"
date = "1997-12-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-December/007789.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-December/007789.html)

This article appeared in The Hindu today :

Spiritual progress

PATHWAY TO GOD IN THE VEDAS: K. D. Sangoram; Copies available with B. R.
Kulkarni, A-4-2, Postal Colony, Hotgi Road, Solapur, 413003, Maharashtra.
Rs. 80.

The Vedas which are God's revelations have given to posterity the concepts
of one God, one world and one humanity. The Rishis who took to propagate
them by transmission through direct teaching were eager to share their
profound thoughts with fellow human beings.

Their wisdom forms the foundation of Hindu religion, the Rig Veda is full of
verses, the Yajur, of formulas, the Sama Veda of Riks in metrical forms. The
Atharva Veda contains chants and incantations.

The sages were aware of the process of re-channelising mind's energy. They
had understood that the assistance of the mind is needed in all that one has
to do. They wanted to redirect its powers, Godward.

The Vedic selections in this volume depict the stages in the progress of a
pilgrim towards the altar of Divinity. The Vedas explain why man turns to
God and why, in doing so, he has to imbibe certain virtues which are
essential to tread the pathway to God.

The author has referred to the incentives to spiritual life as found in the
Vedas under three heads - intellectual, moral and eudaemonistic. Quoting
mantras, he says that God is hidden in the hearts of men who have to
approach Him by all possible means.

Though the Vedic prayers also seek material wealth, men's eyes should be
turned to the light from above. The ideal set by the Rishis through their
interpretation of the Vedas was a judicious blend of worldly happiness and
spiritual bliss on the journey towards God, moral preparation has to be done
and one chapter is devoted to this need, which includes control of the mind,
avoidance of vices and cultivation of virtues.

The arguments to prove God's existence, the nature of Reality, the
relationship between God and a devotee, how God removes an aspirant's
problems, the role and necessity of a spiritual teacher, the Divine Name as
the bond between God and man, methods of meditation, the varieties of
spiritual experience and God- realisation have all been dealt with in this
elaborate study of the Vedic mantras, giving the exact Vedic passages from
which they have been traced.

The author's research work reveals his passion for excellence and
perfection. He has taken up Rig Vedic passages in particular in this effort.
The final aim of Vedic philosophy, the author concludes, is attainment of
the highest peace which is the apex of the bliss of the Brahman.

PS : The Hindu is a leading newspaper in South India and not a religious
magazine.

        Because e-mail can be altered electronically,
        the integrity of this communication cannot be guaranteed.

