+++
title = "204 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-05-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-May/024632.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-May/024632.html)

shrii gurubhyoH namaH
bhava shankara deshika me sharaNaM

We continue with the series. The sanskrit text immediately is
bhagavadpaada's commentary. The text enclosed by '##' and '##' is the
English translation of the relevant portion from Swami
Gambhirananda-ji's BGB translation.

7. na hi atra yuddhakartavyataa vidhiiyate\, yuddha pravR^itta eva hi
asau shokamohapratibaddhaH tushhNiimaaste | ataH tasya
pratibandhaapanayanamaatraM bhagavataa kR^iyate | tasmaat 'yudhyasva'
iti anuvaadamaatram\, na vidhiH || 2.18 ||


##Here, there is no injunction to take up the war as a duty, because
he (Arjuna), though he was determined for war, remains silent as a
result of being overpowered by sorrow and delusion. Therefore, all
that is being done by the Lord is the removal of the obstruction of
his duty. "Therefore, join the battle" is only an approval, not an
injunction.##

8. vidushhaH karmaasaMbhavavachanaat yaani karmaaNi shaastreNa
vidhiiyante taani avidushho vihitaani iti bhagavato
nishchayo.avagamyate || 2.21 ||


## From the statement that action is impossible for a man of
realization it is understood that the conclusion of the Lord is that,
actions enjoined by the scriptures are prescribed for the
unenlightened. ##


9. shaastraachaaryopadeshashamadamaadisaMskR^itaM manaH aatmadarshane
karaNam.h || 2.21 ||

## [In reply to an objection that the Self is beyond any scope of
means of knowledge.] The mind that is purified by the instructions of
the scriptures and the teacher, control of the body and organs, etc.
becomes the instrument for realizing the Self.##


10. naiteshhaaM shlokaanaaM paunaruktyaM chodaniiyam.h\, yataH
ekenaiva shlokena aatmanaH nityatvamavikriyatvaM choktam.h ##'##na
jaayate mriyate vaa##'## ityaadInaa | tatra yadeva aatmavishhayaM
kiMchiduchchate tadetatsmaat shlokaarthaannaatirichyate\;
kiMchichchhabdataH punaruktam.h kiMchidarthataH iti | durbodhatvaat.h
aatmavastunaH punaH punaH prasa~Ngamaapaadya shabdaantareNa tadeva
vastunirUpayati bhagavaan.h vaasudevaH kathaM nu naama
saMsaariNaamasaMsaaritvabuddhi\- gocharataamaapannaM sat avyaktaM
tattvaM saMsaaranivR^ittaye syaat.h iti || 2.24 ||


##It is not to be argued that 'these verses are repetitive since
eternality and changelessness of the Self have been stated in a single
verse itself, "Never is this One born, and never does It die," etc.
(20). Whatever has been said there (in verse 19) about the Self does
not go beyond the meaning of this verse. Something is repeated with
those very words, and something ideologically.' Since the object, viz
the Self, is inscrutable, therefore Lord Vasudeva raises the topic
again and again, and explains that very object in other words so that,
somehow, the unmanifest Self may come within the comprehension of the
intellect of the transmigrating persons and bring about a cessation of
their cycles of births and deaths.##



11. yogasthaH san.h kuru karmaaNi kevalamIshvaraarthanaM\; tatraapi
'iishvaropi me tushhyatu' iti sa~NgaM tyaktvaa || 2.48 ||


##yogasthaH, by becoming established in yoga; O dhananjaya, kuru,
undertake; karmaaNi action, for the sake of God alone; even there,
tyaktva, casting off, sangam, attached in the form, 'God will be
pleased with me'. Undertake work for pleasing God, but not for
propitiating Him to become favorable towards yourself.##



(To be continued.)
praNAms to all advaitins
Ramakrishna

