+++
title = "120 abhishek rk"
date = "2005-01-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-January/013891.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-January/013891.html)

Namaste,
The Bhashya for this verse is (from the translation by
Swami Gambhirananda, Advaita Ashrama):

1. The knowers of Brahman, the worshippers of the five
fires, and those who perform the nAciketa sacrifice
thrice, compare to shade and light, the two enjoyers
of the inevitable results of work, who have entered
within the cavity (of the heart} which is the supreme
abode of the Most High (Brahman).

Pibantau, two drinkers of; Rtam, truth, i.e., the
results of work (which is called truth) because of its
inevitability. Of these two, one drinks- enjoys- the
fruit of work, and not the other. Still both are
called enjoyers, because of association with the
enjoyer, on the analogy of the expression 'the
possessers of the umbrella'[1]. sukRtasya, of what is
done by oneself. This (word) is to be construed with
Rtam, mentioned earlier- (meaning thereby the drinkers
of) the results of the work done by oneself.
praviSTau, (these) two have entered; loke, within this
body; guham, into the cavity, into the intellect.
parame, (means) in the supreme; it (i.e., the space
within the heart) is supreme in comparison with the
space outside (the cavity) cicumscribed by the human
body; parArdhe, into that which is the abode (ardha)
of Brahman (para)-there, indeed, is the supreme
Brahman perceived. So the meaning is that they two
have entered into the supreme abode of brahman, which
is the space within the heart. And brahmavidah, the
knowers of Brahman; vadanti, speak of- these two; as
different like cAyAtapau, shade and light- because of
(their) worldliness and freedom from worldiness. not
only those who have given up rites speak (thus), but
also pancAgnayaH, those who worship the five fires-
i.e., the householders; ca, and also; those who are
trinAciketAh, the people by whom has been piled up
thrice the fire called nAciketa.

[1]:When a king with his retinue moves out in a
procession with umbrellas, people say, 'chatrinaH
yAnti- people with umbrellas are going', though most
of the people in the procession do not possess
umbrellas.

-Regards,
Abhishek

P.S. I believe the two refer to Brahman and the jiva
which is also Brahman(!) but endowed with upAdhis.

bhava Sankara deSika me saraNam
----------------------------------------------------------
Pranam,

Can anyone give their views on the following mantra
from Katha 
Upanishad as per advaita philosophy: 

1.3.1 (rtam pibantau ....)

Who these two persons are, implied as light and
shadow, in this mantra? 
Since both are present in the cavity of heart, is one
them divine and 
other is soul? 

Pranam

Badisa


________________________________________________________________________
Yahoo! Messenger - Communicate instantly..."Ping" 
your friends today! Download Messenger Now 
http://uk.messenger.yahoo.com/download/index.html

