+++
title = "85 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2004-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012706.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012706.html)

-----------------Forwarded Message---------------------------------

Dear Sri Ravisankar,

Thank you very much for the support offered. I am sending below an
invitation letter for subscription from the Editor of TATTVALOKA. 

We would be grateful to you if you could forward the Editor's message to
the discussion groups indicated by you.

Thanks once again,

Best regards,

Sriram



                            EDITOR's MESSAGE



Re:  TATTVALOKA- THE SPLENDOUR OF TRUTH

TATTVALOKA is an English monthly magazine dedicated to truth and moral
excellence. It is published from Chennai, India under the guidance of
Jagadguru Sankaracharya of Sringeri Sri Sharada Peetham. 

TATTVALOKA is a regular reminder of the timeliness of our ancient
heritage and values through ideas taken from our scriptures and
spiritual masters.

An illustrative list of articles in TATTVALOKA would be:
    -  Adi Sankara and World Thought
   -   Practice of Srividya
   -   Vedanta in action
   -   Yoda and Meditation,
   -   The Power of Gayatri Mantra
   -   The Greatness of Dakshinamurti
   -    Hymns for the family
   -    Music in Spiritual Evolution

Other ongoing features include:
    -  Jagadguru speaks,
    -  Upanishadic Messages,
   -   Questions in Spiritual Practice,
   -   Columns for the Young,
   -   Book Condensation.

The magazine recently celebrated its Silver Jubilee (25th year) of
publication and deserves your support.

This letter is a special invitation to you to join the family of members
of TATTVALOKA by subscribing at a very nominal cost. The  subscription
for this monthly magazine, inclusive of airmail is as follows:

 For mailing addresses in India

    - Rs   240 for one year,
    - Rs   648 for three years,
    - Rs   10,000 for life subscription.

For mailing addresses outside India

    - US$   30 for one year,
    - US$   112 for four years,
    - US$   1,000 for life subscription.

Your cheque / Draft may be made payable to " TATTVALOKA" and sent along
with details of the subscriber to:

    TATTVALOKA,
    Abhinav Centre
    19, Co-operative Colony,
    Chamiers Road, Chennai- 600018
    India.

    Tel:    91- 44-  24660023
     Fax   91- 44-  24660065

Your subscription will start immediately on receipt of your payment with
the latest issue. Future copies will be airmailed regularly thereafter.

Any queries/clarifications regarding subscription may kindly be sent by
e-mail also to Tattvaloka at vsnl.com

If you subscribe to TATTVALOKA now, you will also receive a FREE copy of
the beautifully produced book "GOLDEN WORDS" of Jagadguru Sri
Chandrasekhara Bharati of Sringeri.This 64-page illustrated book of
11cms x 16 cms contains several pieces of spiritual advice as given by
the Jagadguru.

Best regards,

Yours sincerely,

T.R.Ramachandran
Publisher and Editor

P.S. For those who would like to request a sample copy of TATTVALOKA,
please send us your mailing address and the name of the recipient to
whom it should be sent. We will be pleased to mail a sample copy with
our compliments.




