+++
title = "43 S Jayanarayanan"
date = "2002-10-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003919.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003919.html)

The website

http://www.indolink.com/Religion/r091702-130924.php

has some photographs (courtesy of NASA), revealing a
man-made bridge under the ocean between India and
Srilanka. The photos are for real, as links to the
official NASA images site bring up the same pictures,
e.g.
http://images.jsc.nasa.gov/iams/images/earth/STS033/lowres/20003372.jpg

Article:
-------------------------
Space images taken by NASA reveal a mysterious ancient
bridge in the Palk Strait between India and Sri Lanka.
The recently discovered bridge currently named as
Adam´s Bridge is made of chain of shoals, c.18 mi (30
km) long.

The bridge´s unique curvature and composition by age
reveals that it is man made. The legends as well as
Archeological studies reveal that the first signs of
human inhabitants in Sri Lanka date back to the a
primitive age, about 1,750,000 years ago and the
bridge´s age is also almost equivalent.

This information is a crucial aspect for an insight
into the mysterious legend called Ramayana, which was
supposed to have taken place in tredha yuga (more than
1,700,000 years ago).

In this epic, there is a mentioning about a bridge,
which was built between Rameshwaram (India) and
Srilankan coast under the supervision of a dynamic and
invincible figure called Rama who is supposed to be
the incarnation of the supreme.

This information may not be of much importance to the
archeologists who are interested in exploring the
origins of man, but it is sure to open the spiritual
gates of the people of the world to have come to know
an ancient history linked to the Indian mythology.
------------------------

Regards,

Kartik

__________________________________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Faith Hill - Exclusive Performances, Videos & More
http://faith.yahoo.com

