+++
title = "213 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2010-11-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025980.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025980.html)

>
> Let me try a simplified explanation here.
>
> e.g. in the sentence, "I am a man", "I" is the word relfexively denoting
> the speaker, "am" is the form of a verb in the present tense, "a" carries
> a meaning of particularity and "man" means a male of the human species.
> The meaning of the entire sentence arises from the relationship arising
> out of putting these four words together into a sentence and the listener
> therefore gets the meaning that the speaker is a man, who is living at
> the time the sentence was spoken and identifying himself as such. Any
> meaning of any sentence will have to arise in a similar fashion.
> .....
> For advaita vedAnta, this obviously has implications for how one grasps
> meaning from the upanishadic statements such as "tat tvam asi" and
> "ayam AtmA brahma".
>
>
Hari Om Shri Vidyasankarji, Pranaams!

The mImAmsA philosophy hold that all words spoken must directly or 
indirectly enjoin some duty or practice on the listeners. Even the apparent 
existential propositions must be ultimately inspired by some practical 
interest. On hearing the word 'cow', one must necessarily expect that 
something has to be done with the cow. It is either to be brought or driven 
away or fastened or let loose...

When prajApati instructed indra and virocana, on Atman, they not only 
misunderstood, virocana also jumped into action of pampering the body.

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya 


