+++
title = "06 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2007-09-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-September/019309.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-September/019309.html)

IMO -

  Example of Carbon is excellent as long as one is prepared from the point of utility of theses individual allotropic forms of carbon and understand their individual dharma (property).

  By itself Carbon is of much more utility for common folks, at least it gives the necessary energy.

  Diamond has a different set of values.

  a.  From crystallography point of view we all know that it can reflect almost 98% of the light and this it's brilliance.  One can even look at it as a shining guNa.

  b.  Due to it's Rarity and the creative marketing from Hollywood.  They are Girl's best Friend.  So it's possession and offering leads to get a personal "devi" for advaya union (two bodies and one soul).

  c.  Diamond being the hardest form of material, industry utilizes the knowledge (this trikaalaatiita j~naana) for thousand and one applications.

  Thus this property (dharma) of these individual forms is the real spirituality that does not alter with time periods. 

  Just some thoughts to ponder. 


br_vinayaka <vinayaka_ns at yahoo.com> wrote:
  Namaste Sri Jaldhar-ji,

You have written:

"For instance a diamond and a lump of coal are both
actually forms of 
carbon yet these things have different names and forms
and are assigned 
very different values by conventional society. But
surely we can say that 
coal and diamond are two forms of one thing without
having to say "coal and 
diamond do not exist"?"

I strongly feel asking of such questions itself is
wrong. Because, in the mAndUkya upanishad nAntaH
prajnam mantra all types of prajna is negated totally
'including' the simultaneous awareness of all the
objects, which is associated with ishwara. So, when
reality is intuited, we are not aware of the forms of
carbon like coal or diamond to compare/reconcile, but
it is something like being one with carbon itself. 

Ever aware of reality alone with the 'knower-known'
process being sublated for ever, is the state of a
jnAni.

Such kind of confusion arises when bening ajnAni one
wants to know the post realized state of a jivanmukta!
I have read in some places that, ajAtivada is upheld
in the sense that name and form eternally exists in
brahman and hence nothing is created. It sounds very
strange to me. I am yet to know how seasoned vedAntins
like Sri SSS and sringeri AchAryas treats this issue.
Pointers from any member with proper reference will be
appreaciated much.

Dear Michael-ji,

Thanks much for your clarification. I am yet to
assimilate the post fully. :-)

Warm Regards,

Br. Vinayaka.





____________________________________________________________________________________
Be a better Globetrotter. Get better travel answers from someone who knows. Yahoo! Answers - Check it out.
http://answers.yahoo.com/dir/?link=list&sid=396545469
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
Shape Yahoo! in your own image.  Join our Network Research Panel today!

