+++
title = "134 D.V.N. Sarma"
date = "2010-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024312.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024312.html)

I accept with thanks your corrections.

regards,
Sarma.

On 4/17/10, V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com> wrote:
> Just two corrections:
>
> 10. Samudra madhana champoo  (Should be spelled  as 'mathana')
>
> The present Jagadguru of Sringeri is: HH Sri Bharati Teertha SwaminaH
>
> Om Tat Sat
>
>
>
> On Sat, Apr 17, 2010 at 3:01 AM, D.V.N. Sarma <dvnsarma at gmail.com> wrote:
>
>> Bellamkonda Ramaraya kavi (1875-1914 AD)
>>
>> Born in Pamidipadu near Narasaraopet in Guntur Dt.A.P.
>> Rik Sakha. Asvalayana Sutra. Bharadvaja Gotram.
>>
>> A great poet and a scholar in sanskrit.
>> By birth he was Visistadvaitin.
>> After studying the advaita classics he became an advaitin.
>> He was hailed as apara sankara by scholars for his works on advaita.
>>
>> Some of his works.
>> 1.GitAbhashyArkaprakAsika (a commentary on GitA bhAshya of Sankara).
>> 2.VedAnta MuktAvaLi (DasOpanishats in the form of slokas).
>> 3.SankarAsankarabhAshya Vimarsa (a work on advaita).
>> 4. SiddhAnta Sindhuh(A commentary on Madhusudana Saraswati's work).
>> 5. VedAnta Kaustubham(A book on advaita).
>> 6. AdvaitAnyamatakhanDanam(A Criticism of tenents other than advaita).
>> 7. SaradrAtri(A commentary on SiddhAnta kaumudi- Awork on grammer).
>> 8.Champoo BhagavatavyAkhya
>> 9.Anargha Raghava VyAkhya.
>> 10. Samudra madhana champoo
>> 11. Krishna leelA tarangiNi (This is different from Narayanatirtha's).
>>
>> And many other stotras and satakas totalling 149 works.
>> He died at the age of 39.
>> The present incumbant of Sringeri Muth Sri Abhinava Vidyatirtha Swami
>> who hails from Narasaraopet may be able to give more information about
>> Sri Rama raya kavi.
>>
>> regards,
>> Sarma.
>>
>>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

