+++
title = "124 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014544.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014544.html)

Namaste

yaj~nArthaM karma kartavyaM  iti shAstreShu coditaM . 
nAhaM karomi niShkAmaH iti karma samAcara .. 151 ..

pUrNo.ahaM ca tathAsa~NgI iti karma samAcara .
kRRitaM shreShTaishca vidvadbhiH iti karma samAcara .. 152
..

prakRRityA kriyate karma iti karma samAcara .
guNA guNeShu vartante iti karma samAcara .. 153 ..

mayi saMnyasyate sarvaM iti karma samAcara .
nistraiguNyasthitashcAhaM iti karma samAcara .. 154 ..

tayorna vashamAgacchhediti karma samAcara .
svadharmAkaraNe doShaH iti karma samAcara .. 155 .. 

shatruH kAmo nihantavya iti karma samAcara .
gItAmRRitodadhirayamiti karma samAcara .. 156 .. 

yatheShTAcaraNaM pApamiti karma samAcara .
j~nAnAgni dagdha-karmAhaM iti karma samAcara .. 157 ..

gatasa~Ngashca mukto.ahaM iti karma samAcara .
ayaj~nasya ca no lokA iti karma samAcara .. 158 ..

Do works. But why and how? Because the shastras have told
us to do  works as a yajna. I am not doing anything. I have
no desires. I am Infinite; I have no attachments. It is the
guNas that involve themselves with other guNas. Everything
merges in me. I am ever fixed beyond the three guNas. I
shall not get into their clutches. If the svadharma is not
done that is a default. It is Desire that is the enemy.
That has to be vanquished. This Fullness of mine is the
Ocean of Gita-nectar. Working according to the whims of the
lower self is sin. All actions are consumed in  the Fire of
Knowledge. Thus shall you do works and thus only shall you
do works.
___________________________________________________________________________

j~nAnayaj~ne sarva-huti nAhaM karteti dhIradhIH .
j~nAnAsinA yoganiShTaH shokamohau taratyathoM .. 159 ..

Everything shall be offered to the yajna-fire of Knowledge.
The wise man, cuts asunder sorrow and delusion by the sword
of Knowledge, that is, by the attitude of
‘I-am-not-the-doer’.
_______________________________________________________________________________
ahaMkAraH nAtmAnamAvArayituM shaknoti . AvArayati cet
svayamapyaprakAsho bhavati .
niShkAma-karmAnuShTAnArambha-kAla eva ahaM niShkAma iti
manaH svAsthyaM svashuddhatva-viShaye apekShyate
karmA~Ngatvena . sva-kartRRitva-bhAvanAM vihAyaiva karma
kuryAt iti shAsyate . karmAnuShTAna-kAle.api yaj~na  eva
ijyate ArAdhyate iti sadA vicArayet .
jIveshvara-jagadapavAdena svasvarUpAvasheShaNArthaM  satAM
saMgaH nissaMgatAsiddhyai sadA sevyA iti satsu pravartayati
bhagavAn . yatra sarvaM bhUyate iti sarva-hRRidyaj~naH
sUktoktaH .. 

The ego cannot engulf the Atman. If it does so it does it
to itself also. Even as one starts doing his karma
desirelessly, right at the beginning, one fixes one’s mind
on  the subject of Pure Consciousness as if it is part of
the very karma that is being performed.  The injunction is
that one should do  works only after  abandoning the agency
of the action. The doing of rituals also has to be done as
a yajna in the same manner. The superimposition of the 
universe on the Reality, has to be discarded.  It is only
by the association with noble souls that this can be
achieved.  (I am leaving the last sentence untranslated .. 
VK)
_________________________________________________________________________-

PrNAms to all advaitins and to my father.
profvk



