+++
title = "138 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014561.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014561.html)

Namaste.

 upadekShyanti te j~nAnaM iti satsu pravartanaM .
saMshayAshca nivartyantAM iti satsu pravartanaM .. 160 ..

AcAraH prathamo dharmaH iti satsu pravartanaM .
bhImAdayo na gaNyante iti satsu pravartanaM .. 161 ..

j~nAninA hRRidayaM vedyaM iti satsu pravartanaM . 
bahirveShAnmA.astu mohaH iti satsu pravartanaM .. 162 ..

The noble ones teach the Knowledge and clear doubts.
Regulated behaviour is the first dharma.  “bhIma, etc.” are
not of any value. The resident inside has to be known only
by a jnAni. Do not be carried away by outer glamour.  Thus
may you seek the company of the noble sAtvic ones.
_________________________________________________________


yAvatA svAtmani vishrAntirna bhavati tAvatA vicAraNaM
kAryameva . indriyebhyaH parA hyarthAH iti
sapta-prAkAra-madhyasthaH parameshvaro ra~NgarAjaH
koshavicAreNa vij~nAtavyaH paritaH . parItya lokAn parItya
bhUtAni parItya sarvAH pradisho dishashca iti
sarvatastadastitvameva vicArya j~nAtavyaM . dharma-mArgaM
caritreNa iti sadAcArasya abhilaShitvAt .. 

Synopsis: So long as you don’t see Peace in Your Self, that
long the enquiry (into the Self) has to be pursued. Recall
the saying about Sri Rama: ‘dharma-mArgam charitreNa’.
_____________________________________________________
evaM turIyAdhyAyAnte tRRitIyAmArukSati .
j~nAninaH kAma-saMkalpavarjitA iti shAsanaM .. 163 ..

Thus by the end of the fourth chapter one ascends the third
step of ‘tanu-mAnasI’ – thinning of the mind.  The wise men
are supposed to be devoid of all sankalpa, that is, wishful
resolution.
_______________________________________________________________
yasyAM ca procjhitAsheSha-saMkalpa-kalanaH pumAn .
saMkalpanaM mano viddhi manasA nyAsa iShyate .. 164 ..

Man has to erase all such wishful thinking without any
residue whatsoever. Such fanciful thinking is purely a
mental activity. The mind has to renounce it.
_________________________________________________________
mAyA sRRiShTe ca manasi pratyayAshca sahasrashaH . 
vividhAH kalpanAstyaktvA mano yu~njyAcca shAntaye .. 165 ..

All these imaginations have been created by me in my own
mind.  Renouncing all such imaginations, the mind has to be
yoked to the Absolute on the road to Peace.
___________________________________________________________________
mano nikShipya sAmye ca nirdoShe brahmaNi sthitaH .
sa brahma-yoga-yuktAtmA dhIndriyANi niyacchhati .. 166 ..

Having established the mind in that Equanimity that is
Brahman the blemishless,  the yogi now yoked in brahma yoga
controls his intellect as well as the senses. 
_____________________________________________________
sarva-saMkalpa-saMnyAsI hyAste ca nitarAM sati .
nivAtasthita-dIpena sAmyaM prApnoti sarvathA .. 167 ..

Such a renouncer who has relinquished all imaginations
remains always like the lamp in the windless environment
and attains the Equanimous state of Peace.
____________________________________________________________
cittaM niruddhaM yogena nistara~Nga samudravat .
guNAtItaH shAntamanAH ArUDhaH samadarshanaH .. 168 ..

Yoga has dammed the mind and made it like an ocean without
waves. He is the one who has transcended the gunas, with
Peace in the mind, and an equanimous view all around. He is
the one who has made the Ascent.
__________________________________________________________
akhaNDabhagavadrUpe yogArUDhashca vartate . 
upAyena tu vashyAtmA shabda-brahmAtivartate .. 169 ..

The Yogi who has got to the peak of yoga lives in that
conscious presence of the Infinite. Having conquered the
Self by proper means he goes beyond the shabda-brahman,
that is, the scriptural literature.
____________________________________________________________
AtmAkAramano vRRittyA sarvadA sthIyate tviti .
bhUmikAtritayaM jAgrat ShaShTenaiva samApyate .. 170 ..

With his mind engulfed by the Self he stands there. Thus
the three steps of the ascent  (considered as corresponding
to the waking state) are concluded in the sixth chapter of
the Gita.

Note:  The word ‘jAgrat’ is significant here. The next
(fourth) step that is going to come in shloka 171 is being
declared by the author to correspond to the ‘dreaming
state’ and later on the ‘sleep state’  is also coming. But
the logic, rationality or significance of this
correspondence is not clear to me: VK 
___________________________________________________________________
tRRitIyA bhUmikA tanumAnasItyucyate .
saMkalpa-vikalpAtmakatvameva manaH . kAyena manasA buddhyA
. sarvakarmANi manasA . sAmye sthitaM manaH. yatInAM
yatacetasAM . yatendriya-manobuddhiH .
samaloShTAshma-kA~ncanaH . samabuddhirvishiShyate . ekAgraM
manaH kRRitvA . manassamyamya maccittaH . yogI
niyatamAnasaH . yadA viniyataM cittaM . yogino
yata-cittasya . AtmasamsthaM manaH kRRitvA . yato yato
nishcarati manaH . prashAnta-manasaM . caMcalaM hi manaH .
mano durnigrahaM calaM . ityAdi gItA shlokeShu
manastAnavapratipAdakeShu tRRitIyA bhUmikoddharaNaM kriyate
.. 

The third Step is ‘tanumAnasI’ – thinning of the mind. Mind
is nothing but resolution and perturbation. How the
thinning of the mind happens – is portrayed in several gita
shlokas quoted here; V – 11, 13, 19, 26, 28; VI – 8, 9, 12,
14, 15, 18, 19, 25, 26, 27. 34, 35.
_____________________________________________________________________________
PraNAms to all advaitins and to my father.
profvk


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

New on my  website, particularly for beginners in Hindu philosophy:
Empire of the Mind:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/ManversusMind.html

Free will and Divine will - a dialogue:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/FWDW.html

