+++
title = "140 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014563.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014563.html)

Namaste.

svapnAvasthA caturthIti sattvApattyAkhya-bhUmikA .
samaM sarvatra pashyanti saccidAnanda-rUpataH .. 171 ..

sadasattatparaM brahma arUpaM rUpavarjitaM .
vishvarUpaM mahArUpaM anantaM saumyamadbhutaM .. 172 ..

dvAdashAntaM caturthA hi bhUmikA svapnavatkila .
ananya-bhakti-sAdhyA ca vara-prakRRiti-niShTatA .. 173 ..

rasaprabhA-shabda-gandhAH grAhyAssUkShmAshca sarvadA .
sarve bhAvA bhagavataH mAyikA iti nishcayaH .. 174 ..

uddhartavyaM ca tajjyotiH AsamantAcca rAdhyate .
tadArAdhanamityuktaM pApAnte bhavati dhruvaM .. 175 ..

vyutthAyomiti dRRishyAcca vicArAttanumAnasaH .
ananyacintayaikatvaM sattvApattyAM ca labhyate .. 176 .. 

vibhUtInAM ca vij~nAnAt eka-vij~nAnamiShyate . 
dvaita-shAntyA sthirAdvaitaM sAmyatvasyAvasheShataH .. 177
.

sattvaM vishuddhaM vasudeva saMj~nitaM yatra pratIyate
vAsudevaH vishuddhasattvaM tava dhAma shAntaM j~nAnaM
vishuddhaM paramArthamekaM iti bhAgavatokta-prakAreNa
sattvApattiH ..

Synopsis:   Of the seven steps, the fourth step called
‘sattvApatti’ (attainment of sattva)  corresponds to the
dream state. Because of the Existence-Knowledge-Bliss form
they see the same Absolute everywhere. It is formless. It
is the absolute Brahman – Existence as well as
Non-existence. Its form comprises the entire universe, it
is grandiose, infinite, beatific and wonderful. This fourth
step is attainable by a one-pointed devotion. All the
sense-objects like sound, smell etc. are all only the
effect of the Lord’s mAyA. That effulgence has to be drawn
out (*uddhartavyaM*). And it has to be propitiated
(*rAdhyate*)  from all counts (*aa*). That is called
*ArAdhanaM*. And thus one rises up with the awareness of
‘AuM’ from the visible universe.  By this enquiry one is
led to the thinning of the mind. With one-pointed
deliberation of this One-ness one attains the
*sattvApatti*.  In the BhagavataM (4-3-23)  Lord Shiva says
the One Unique Absolute is given the name of Vasudeva
because that is where He is revealed without any covering,
as Pure Consciousness. This realisation is “satvApatti”,
that is, the mind in  the pure sattva. 
---------------------------------------------------
Note by VK: For  an explanation of the seven BhumikAs
(stgeps)  please see YogAmRRitam -13  in 
http://www.escribe.com/culture/advaitin/m25495.html

PraNAms to all advaitins on this list and to my father. 
Profvk



