+++
title = "140 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014563.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014563.html)

Namaste.

svapnAvasthA caturthIti sattvApattyAkhya-bhUmikA .
samaM sarvatra pashyanti saccidAnanda-rUpataH .. 171 ..

sadasattatparaM brahma arUpaM rUpavarjitaM .
vishvarUpaM mahArUpaM anantaM saumyamadbhutaM .. 172 ..

dvAdashAntaM caturthA hi bhUmikA svapnavatkila .
ananya-bhakti-sAdhyA ca vara-prakRRiti-niShTatA .. 173 ..

rasaprabhA-shabda-gandhAH grAhyAssUkShmAshca sarvadA .
sarve bhAvA bhagavataH mAyikA iti nishcayaH .. 174 ..

uddhartavyaM ca tajjyotiH AsamantAcca rAdhyate .
tadArAdhanamityuktaM pApAnte bhavati dhruvaM .. 175 ..

vyutthAyomiti dRRishyAcca vicArAttanumAnasaH .
ananyacintayaikatvaM sattvApattyAM ca labhyate .. 176 .. 

vibhUtInAM ca vij~nAnAt eka-vij~nAnamiShyate . 
dvaita-shAntyA sthirAdvaitaM sAmyatvasyAvasheShataH .. 177
.

sattvaM vishuddhaM vasudeva saMj~nitaM yatra pratIyate
vAsudevaH vishuddhasattvaM tava dhAma shAntaM j~nAnaM
vishuddhaM paramArthamekaM iti bhAgavatokta-prakAreNa
sattvApattiH ..

Synopsis:   Of the seven steps, the fourth step called
sattvApatti (attainment of sattva)  corresponds to the
dream state. Because of the Existence-Knowledge-Bliss form
they see the same Absolute everywhere. It is formless. It
is the absolute Brahman  Existence as well as
Non-existence. Its form comprises the entire universe, it
is grandiose, infinite, beatific and wonderful. This fourth
step is attainable by a one-pointed devotion. All the
sense-objects like sound, smell etc. are all only the
effect of the Lords mAyA. That effulgence has to be drawn
out (*uddhartavyaM*). And it has to be propitiated
(*rAdhyate*)  from all counts (*aa*). That is called
*ArAdhanaM*. And thus one rises up with the awareness of
AuM from the visible universe.  By this enquiry one is
led to the thinning of the mind. With one-pointed
deliberation of this One-ness one attains the
*sattvApatti*.  In the BhagavataM (4-3-23)  Lord Shiva says
the One Unique Absolute is given the name of Vasudeva
because that is where He is revealed without any covering,
as Pure Consciousness. This realisation is satvApatti,
that is, the mind in  the pure sattva. 
---------------------------------------------------
Note by VK: For  an explanation of the seven BhumikAs
(stgeps)  please see YogAmRRitam -13  in 
http://www.escribe.com/culture/advaitin/m25495.html

PraNAms to all advaitins on this list and to my father. 
Profvk



