+++
title = "36 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014453.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014453.html)

Namaste.

NOTE TO READERS:  FROM NOW ON, THE WORK GETS MORE AND MORE
ENIGMATIC. MY TRANSLATIONS COULD UTMOST BE ONLY
APPROXIMATE. SOMETIMES THEY MAY BE TOTALLY OFF THE MARK. I
AM ONLY GROPING IGNORANTLY IN THE DARK. SO ANY HELP
RENDERED BY READERS IS WELCOME.  I AM INDEBTED TO SUNDER-JI
AND NAIR-JI WHO HAVE BEEN OF GREAT HELP ALREADY...VK
________________________________________________
deha-prANendriyAdIni shUnyAnIti ca ye viduH .
teShAmAdhAra-bhUtAste na badhyante ca karmabhiH .. 131 ..

The body, the PrANas and the senses, etc. are all of no
content. They are void.  Those who know this remain as the
substratum for all these and therefore are not affected by
the actions.
____________________________________________________________________________________-

ekabhAvassatyam iti asatyA itare.api ca .
tebhyashcApi samutthAya prathamAM bhUmikAmapi .. 132 ..

The Oneness is the Truth. All else is other than Truth.
>From then one has to rise. And one has to rise from the
first step also.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
ArUDhasya tu sa~NgitvaM dehAdInAM ca yogataH .
na kadApi bhavecceti asa~Ngitvasya nishcayAt .. 133 ..

By yoga one ascends. For one who has made the ascent,
attachment to the body, etc. can never happen, because of
the determination to be non-attached. 
______________________________________________________________________________________________
ghaTAkAsha-maThAkAsha-vicAreNApyasa~NgitA .
dvidho.ayamasaMsargaH sAmAnyaH shreShTa eva ca .. 134 ..

Non-attachment arises by enquiry about the space within and
space without.  Non-attachment is of two kinds: ordinary
and special.
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
nAhaM karteti bhAvena svasya sphaTika-tulyatA .
japAkusuma-saMbandhAt raktimA sphaTikasya kiM .. 135 .. 

I am not the doer. This is the attitude comparable to the
whiteness of crystal. The redness of the association with
habiscus – what has it to do with the crystal?
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
sadA svacchho hi sphaTikaH ra~njanaM na tu vAstavaM .
ato dehAdi ceShTAshca nArhanti spraShTumeva hi .. 136 ..

The crystal is always pure white. The redness is not the
reality. Therefore the activities of the body etc. cannot
ever touch (the Self).
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
asa~Ngo na hi sajjyate asito na vyathate na riShyati (bRRi
U 3-9-26) amUrtatvAt . mUrtaH mUrtAntareNa saMbadhyamAnaH
sajyate . asa~Ngasya puruShasya ashanAyAdivarjitasya
upaniShatpramANaikagamyasya yAthAtmye vij~nAte
tadbhAva-bhAvitasya muktatvaM svataH siddhameva ..

Synopsis:  “It is unattached; for it never attaches itself
to anything. It is unfettered  and so it never feels pain.
It never suffers injury.”(Br. U. 3-9-26). Only a form with
its association with other forms gets attachment. The
Purusha is free from attachments.  He has no feelings of
hunger and the like. He is the Truth as uniquely evidenced
by the authority of the Upanishad. When this Truth is
known, for one who has become that Truth, Liberation is
self-evident.
________________________________________________________________________________________________
PraNAms to all advaitins on this list and to my father.
profvk




Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
New on my  website, particularly for beginners in Hindu philosophy:

Hinduism for the next generation: http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach10.html

Free will and Divine will - a dialogue:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/FWDW.html

