+++
title = "60 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014471.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-April/014471.html)

Namaste

NOTE: PLEASE RECALL THE NOTE AT THE BEGINNING OF
YOGAMRRITAM #11.
http://www.escribe.com/culture/advaitin/m25427.html

aj~nAnAdbhAti kartRRitvaM tasya saMhArakaH shivaH .
shivo hi karuNAmUrtiH kAraNe deha AsthitaH .. 137 ..

Agency of action appears because of ignorance.  The
destroyer of that is Lord Shiva. He is the Compassionate
One. He is situated in the Causal Body.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anandakoshe yastiShTet sa hi vishveshvaraH shivaH .
kartRRitvaM tadadhInaM ca sukhaM dukhaM tathaiva ca .. 138
..

The One who is in the  Ananda-kosha is Lord Shiva the Lord
of the Universe.  Agency of Action is in His control. Also
Happiness as well as Unhappiness. 
______________________________________________________________________
iti bhAvamapi tyaktvA shreShTAsa~NgaM samAshrayet . 
dehAdInAm ca shUnyatvAt na prAkkarma na ceshvaraH .. 139 ..

Even this attitude has to be renounced.  Adopt the
non-attachment that has been termed as ‘Special’. Since the
body and the like are nothing but void (from the Absolute
sense) there is no previous karma nor there is an ishvara
(to deal them).
_______________________________________________________________________________________
shuddhacidvyoma-rUpatvAt akhaNDatvAcca pUrNataH .
j~nAnadehashca taddehaH aj~nAnasyApi bhAsakaH .. 140 ..

My form is only that of Knowledge. It is Full, it is
unfragmented. Because it is the space of Pure
Consciousness. It is what lights up the Ignorance also. 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
anityadehasaMbandhaH sarvathA tyajyate yadA .
tadA dehapravrajanaM siddhyatyasharIratA .. 141 ..

The association with this ephemeral body has by all means
to be cast off. Then and only then the exist from the body
, that is, the bodiless attitude is achieved.

___________________________________________________________________________________________

shubhecchhAyAmagrabhUmyAM dehabhRRitvaM nirasyate .
yanmaunamAsanaM shAntaM audAsInyaM ca gIyate .. 142 ..

By the first step, which is named ‘shubecchA’, the
body-luggage is negated. And what is glorified is Sitting
in silence, Peacefulness and  Neutrality.

______________________________________________________________________________________________

evaM dRRishyopekShayA ca matparo yoga AsthitaH .
iti praj~nAM pratiShTApya naShTamoho bhavediti .. 143 ..

By the adoption of this vision, one steadies himself in
yoga, with Me as the goal. When the intellect is anchored
this way, the delusion will be gone. 

__________________________________________________________________

eShA brAhmIsthitiriti dvitIyAmArurukShati .
ekabhAvasyAsya dArDhyaM vicArAdibhirIhate .. 144 ..

This is the BrAhmI-sthiti (mentioned at the end of the
second chapter of the Gita). That takes one now to the
second step. 

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
nityavastvetat . anityametat . iti vivekaH kAryaH .
iShTAniShTe, AnukUlya-pratikUle,  priyApriye,
preyaHshreyasI , sadasat , eteShAM tattvaM vicAraNIyaM .
sthitvAsyAmantakAle.api ityantya-bhUmikApi sUcyate .
saptasu bhUmikAsvapi akhaNDapUrNa eka-bhAva eva bhAvabhedAH
sopAnatayA ucyante . evaM vedAnta-vicArasya
adhikAri-nirUpaNaM viShayasya sthUlatayA saMkShepena
pratipAdanaM brahmApti tatsaMbandhashca ityanubandhaM
catuShTayamapi samagreNa uktaM adhyAyadvaye.api
shAstrarItyA arghyAntadhyAnavat .. 

Discrimination between what is eternal and what is
ephemeral is to be done. Enquiry is to be pursued into the
fundamentals that govern  likes and dislikes, favourable
and unfavourable, good and bad, real and unreal. 
‘Established therein,, even at the end of one’s life’ (B.G.
2nd ch. #72), -- this is indicative also of the last step
(in the sequence of seven steps). In all the seven steps
what is reiterated  is the same attitude of Oneness of the
Unfragmented Fullness  Absolute. It is described in terms
of seven steps that are only different shades in the bHAva
(attitude). Demarcation of prerequisites for enquiry  the
Vedanta way;  Concrete delineation in brief of the Subject
of enquiry;  ‘obtaining’ of brahman; and “tat
sambandhashca” ( = ??)  -- these four  consequences  have
been formally declared in the 2nd chapter (“in two chapters
?)  like the winding up dhyAna after ‘arghya’.

PraNAms to all advaitins and to my father.
profvk



Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
New on my  website, particularly for beginners in Hindu philosophy:

Hinduism for the next generation: http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach10.html

Free will and Divine will - a dialogue:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/FWDW.html

