+++
title = "129 VP Nandakumar"
date = "1997-04-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-April/006271.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-April/006271.html)

"I'm a sinner and you're a sinner, but someday the sinner will be Brahma again,
will someday attain Nirvana, will someday become a Buddha. Now this someday is
an illusion; it's only a comparison. The sinner is not on his way to a
Buddha-like state. He is not evolving, although our thinking cannot conceive
things otherwise. No, the potential Buddha already exists in the sinner; his
future is already there. The potential hidden Buddha must be recognized in him,
in you, in everybody. The world is not imperfect or slowly evolving along a long
path to perfection. No, it's perfect at every moment, every sin already carries
grace within it, all children are potential old men, all sucklings have death
within them, all dying people - eternal life.

It's not possible for one  person to see how far another is on the way, the
Buddha exists in the robber and dice player; the robber exists in the Brahmin.
During deep meditation it is possible to dispel time, to see simultaneously all
the past, present and future and then everything is good, perfect and Brahman.
Everything exists in good - death as well as life, sin as well as holiness,
widsom as well as folly. Everything is necessary, everything needs only my
agreement, my assent, my loving understanding, then all is well within me and
nothing can harm me.

I learned thru my body and soul that it was necessary for me to sin, that I
needed lust and to strive for property and experience nausea and the depths of
despair in order to learn not to resist them, in order to love the world and not
compare it with some kind of desired imaginary world, some imaginary vision of
perfection, but to leave it as it is, to love and be glad to belong to it"

