+++
title = "50 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2018-03-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-March/048765.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-March/048765.html)

I do not think that varna is carried to the next reincarnation.
In an earlier birth Narada was a sudra hence was denied spiritual
instruction. in his next birth he was reborn as brahmana and was
imparted spiritual instruction.
Narada is considered as amsa avatara of vishnu.

regards,
Sarma.

On Sun, Mar 4, 2018 at 8:29 AM, Shashwata Shastri via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> Namaste,
> Since ghata vAba can only generate ghata padArtha is it possible to
> interchange varNas in the course of the recycle of rebirth? To make it more
> simple and clear- do the mImamsAs agree? achArya kokileshwar Shastri
> Mahodaya did bring an interesting discussion regarding the particular point
> in his famous book advaitya vAda (Second chapter 'jeeva varga savrupa').
> Purva Mimansa also agrees that change of one's varna is impossible
> (Referring to Tantravartika). A dvija.h can only take birth in a dvija kula
> since the process of being born is connected to the anadi samskara (We
> atone for our sins and rejoice for our virtues and we take birth because of
> adrishta and karmapeksha e.g production of corps for consumption and
> maintaining ecological balance) that has been accumulated eternally. I
> would like like to get valuable scholastic views from the learned scholars
> highlighting the topic who are respected members of the group. Please do
> not restrict the references only from puraANas (valid discussion is needed
> since arthavAda has to be taken under consideration according to vAkya
> shAstra) and chAndogya ( A certain mantra referring to the cause of
> regeneration in different kulas or vamshas, achArya's commentary regarding
> the verse has an important stance relating to the translation)
>
>
> Best Regards,
> Shashwata Chowdhury
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
