+++
title = "471 arp fai"
date = "2011-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028275.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-July/028275.html)

Dear Sirs,

Rig Veda                1.164.41


"The cow, having bellowed, produces waters, becoming 1 footed, 2 footed, 4
footed, 8 footed, 9 footed, is of 1000 syllables in the highest heaven"


he mantra's original setting, in the Rig Veda 1.164 , is wholly
appropriate. This is the famous suktam, beginng with "asya vAmasya...".  It
is a hymn well worth serious study by students of advaita, as it directly
communicates the nature of the Supreme, as revealed through the Divine Word,
the setting of which is the Yajna. We see in the hymn that Yajna's purpose
is to declare the identity of the yajamAna with the Supreme. Very much like
Shakespeare's Hamlet, it has famous verses throughout the hymn that are
often quoted and appear in other places time and again.  Here are a just a
few by way of example:


but Agniveer(arya samaj) has translated it as below



One ved, two ved, or four ved along with ayurved, dhanurved, gandharved,
aarthved etc in addition with education, kalp, grammar, nirukt, astrology,
meters i.e the six vedaang should be attained by the clear-minded woman,
which is equivalent to the crystal-clear water and spread this diversified
knowledge among the people.
(Book: Vagambhraniya, Author: Dr Priyamvada Vedbharti)

Rig ved 1.164.41 - O men and women! A scholarly woman who has practiced or
teaches one, two or four Vedas or four Vedas and four upavedas, along with
grammar, etymology etc and spreads knowledge to whole world and removes
ignorance of people is source of happiness for entire world. A woman who
studies and teaches all parts of Vedas brings progress to all human beings
(Book: Rigveda Bhashyam, Part III, Author: Dayanand Saraswati,Vedic
Yantralaya, )

is this correct . Please clarify  ..

Thanks in advance

