+++
title = "102 abhishek rk"
date = "2005-01-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-January/013813.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-January/013813.html)

Interesting excerpt from the Nampoothiri site:

"leader, Mezhathol Agnihothri, declined the request
saying that he is performing it not for a better
position but for retaining the culture of Yaagam among
Brahmanans"

http://www.namboothiri.com/articles/agnihothri.htm
-------------------------------------------------------
According to history, after Budha and Jain periods,
the deteriorated Vedadharma and Yagna (Yaagam) culture
were rejuvenated in Kerala, several years later, by
Mezhathol Agnihothri, by performing Yaagam ninety-nine
times, one after the other. Only seven of the thirty
two Namboothiri Graamams (villages) co-operated with
Agnihothri and accepted the Yaagam culture again. Even
today, only these seven Graamams (Thaliparambu,
Alathur, Karikkad, Panniyur, Sukapuram, Perumanam and
Irinjalakkuda) have families having right to perform
Yaagams. It has to be noted that seventeen experts are
needed to perform Yaagam. For all these 99 Yaagams,
Mezhathol Agnihothri drew these seventeen experts from
seven Namboothiri families, viz, Kalakandathur Griham,
Maathur Griham, Kulukkamillaavur Griham, Chemmangad
Griham, Paazhoor Griham, Muringoth Griham and Vella
Griham. 

It is said that a person who performs 100 Yaagams will
become god Indran. When 99 Yaagams were over, Lord
Indran feared that his power would be lost to the
Yajamaanan (leader) of this Yaagam. Indran personally
arrived in the 99th Yaagasaala to accept the oblations
meant for each of them, and pleaded to Mezhathol
Agnihothri to stop performing the 100th Yaagam. The
leader, Mezhathol Agnihothri, declined the request
saying that he is performing it not for a better
position but for retaining the culture of Yaagam among
Brahmanans. Indran then conceded Mezhathol Agnihothri
and his seven colleagues, his equal status. 
-------------------------------------------------------



________________________________________________________________________
Yahoo! Messenger - Communicate instantly..."Ping" 
your friends today! Download Messenger Now 
http://uk.messenger.yahoo.com/download/index.html

