+++
title = "16 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2008-07-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020379.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-July/020379.html)

Namaste Latha-ji:

Why do you think that Acharyaencompassed "strii, baala, andha & jaDa" in one group ?

Regards,

Dr. Yadu



--- On Thu, 7/3/08, latha vidyaranya <lathavidya at yahoo.co.in> wrote:

From: latha vidyaranya <lathavidya at yahoo.co.in>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] varNAsharama system at the time of shankara
To: "Advaita List" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Thursday, July 3, 2008, 10:58 PM

hari om
namaste

yes, thanks to those whobelieve that 'tvam' in "tat tvam
asi" is all inclusive and hence have an egalitarian view.

when i wrote my comment, i was only remembering incidences when some
peopleused to equate stree with baala, jada, andha (just becoz sri shankara
has made that sentence in one of the stanzas of sri dakshinamurthy stotra) and
used to belittle a woman who was aspiring to realize the ultimate. the word
'people' in my comment does not include people from this List :))

namaste

--- On Fri, 4/7/08, Anbu sivam2 <anbesivam2 at gmail.com> wrote:

From: Anbu sivam2 <anbesivam2 at gmail.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] varNAsharama system at the time of shankara
To: lathavidya at yahoo.co.in, "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta"
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Friday, 4 July, 2008, 6:41 AM


People argue on what they want to agrue. Karma is kama driven. Arguing is
karma too!

Our scriptures clearly say 'Tat Tvam Asi'. It would not have said it
if you didn't have the right to know. 'Tvam' does not exclude
anyone. It is an unconditional 'Tvam'!

Anbu




Get an email ID as yourname at ymail.com or yourname at rocketmail.com. Click here.


      Meet people who discuss and share your passions. Go to
http://in.promos.yahoo.com/groups/bestofyahoo/
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




