+++
title = "60 Sundaresan, Vidyasankar (GE Infra,\tWater)"
date = "2007-10-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-October/019514.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-October/019514.html)


Recently, there has been some concern about member introductions being
available via web searches. I would request list members to please
remember the following points.

1. When we came up with a list policy to ask for introductions, we were
not interested in such private and personal details as your mailing
addresses and phone numbers. Rather, we only wanted to know the reasons
for your joining the Advaita-L mailing list. A little bit of personal
background necessarily enters into the picture there, but our goal was
to prevent spammers and trollers from invading the list. In general, we
have generally edited out the introductions that you have sent us in the
past, to remove more personal details that would furnish private data to
a general user of the internet. As moderators, Jaldhar, Ravi and I
sincerely regret what happened in one particular member's case and are
working to address it.

2. The list archives are in the public domain. Not only your initial
introductions forwared by one of the moderators, but also every post
that you make as a member of the list will be available via a web
search. Your posts are not actively moderated, so that your views and
any personal details you choose to include in your posts are matters of
public knowledge. If you are concerned about potential problems, please
exercise due caution when you post to the list. You are the best judge
of what should be private and what can be shared regarding your views
and personal details.

3. We appreciate that many of you are largely silent members of the
list, so that the only link between you and the list that is public data
is the introductory e-mail that we have forwarded. If you believe that
your introduction should not be available with the list archives, please
do not send an email to the entire list. Instead, send a private email
to the moderators at

advaita-l-owner at lists.advaita-vedanta.org 

I am not promising that we will immediately be able to remove your
introduction from the archives, but we can discuss specific concerns, if
any.

Best regards,
> Vidyasankar Sundaresan
Moderator, Advaita-L

