+++
title = "210 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-11-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-November/047622.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-November/047622.html)

Dear Sir,         Source : TIMES, Author: Sir Jiddu Krishna Murthy(11/5/1895-17/2/1986)
         Yesterday,there was a talk by Sir Jiddu Krishna murthy in speaking tree & some of his works , quotes are excellent and exists in practical reality. The essence of success is that it is never necessary to think of new idea oneself.It is far better to wait untilsomebody else does it & then copy to him in every details , except his MISTAKES.
Theresexists tremendous violence, Uncertainty & fear. Now in the present Scenario, the Society is runs by wars, separate religions with different nationalities each in conflict with the other. There is no faith exists literally and trust is no more available with anybody. Now the world is going into a society where there is constant war, insecurity & fear. So every human being is concerned with the primary issue which has to live in the world, to earn, to have late technological skills & yet having no intentions to destroy one another.To live apeaceful life, peace is our daily life without any competition & nodestructive ambition is necessary.
Some of the Sir's QUOTES: It is no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society.Truth is a pathless land, and you cannot approach it by any path whatsoever, by any religion, by any sect.All ideologies are idiotic, whether religious or political, for it is conceptual thinking, the conceptual word, which has so unfortunately divided man.The constant assertion of belief is an indication of fear.If we can really understand the problem, the answer will come out of it, because the answer is not separate from the problem.If you begin to understand what you are without trying to change it, then what you are undergoes a transformation.KameswaraDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
