+++
title = "136 Miguel Angel Carrasco"
date = "1998-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-February/008098.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-February/008098.html)

On  Sat, 21 Feb 1998, Nagy wrote:
^ÓComing to the point do we have 2 or 3 states. Anybody like to comment?^Ô

I^Òd rather say there is only one state, as there is only one reality, which
never changes. Only appearances change  through not two or three but many
states. Are you only an appearance, Nagy?

Nisargadatta:

Only reality is, there is nothing else. The three states of waking,
dreaming and sleeping are not me, and I am not in them.  (191)

They are only states of mind, which again is but an appearance of movement
in consciousness.  (370)

No state of mind can be more real than the mind itself. Is the mind real?
It is but a collection of states, each of them transitory. How can a
succession of transitory states be considered real? The illusion of being
the body-mind is there only because it is not investigated.
Non-investigation is the thread on which all the states of mind are strung.
 (134-135)

I am beyond the mind and its various states and conditions. Distinctions
are created by the mind and apply to the mind only. I am pure Consciousness
itself, un-broken awareness of all that is. I am in a more real state than
yours. I am undistracted by the distinctions and separations which
constitute a person.  (221)

All the three states are sleep to me. My waking state is beyond them. As I
look at you, you all seem asleep, dreaming up worlds of your own. I am
aware, for I imagine nothing. It is not samadhi , which is but a kind of
sleep. It is just a state unaffected by the mind, free from the past and
future. In your case it is distorted by desire and fear, by memories and
hopes; in mine it is as it is - normal. To be a person is to be asleep.
(453)

