+++
title = "177 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "2017-05-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-May/045212.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-May/045212.html)

Kalyan,

Here's an exercise you can do. Please visit
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l, click on the links
that say "author" and count the number of your posts each month over the
last three months or so. Also count how many posts were sent by me and by
Jaldhar Vyas, another moderator, and by say, DVN Sarma or Praveen Bhat,
other regular list members over the same time period. Then tell me whether
you can actually count yourself as only an occasional contributor on this
list. After that look at the basic numbers, take a look at the content of
your posts and be a little honest with yourself about your constantly
combative attitude on this list. This last post of yours to which I'm
responding now is itself a case in point.

We have not thrown you out of this list for two reasons.

Firstly, no matter what preconceptions you have about us, it's not our
style. We don't kick someone off just because of differing opinions on one
issue or the other.At some point of time in the past, you asked to be here
and we said yes. I, for one, am holding out for a chance that behind your
increasingly bitter tone, perhaps you're genuinely interested in having an
actual conversation and discussion.

Secondly, I'm not going to give you the satisfaction of booting you out,
because that seems to be precisely what you want me to do. See, as I age,
I'm becoming a bit contrary that way. If you feel the atmosphere of this
list is not for you, it is for you to decide whether you want to continue
being a member. The other members of this list have no additional
obligation to make you feel welcome, when you appear so determined to feel
otherwise. You cannot constantly keep fighting and expect others to
accommodate you every time. The ball is in your court.

Vidyasankar


ps. My response is about list moderation issues. I'm not going to address
the question you've asked about avidyA so long as this issue remains.
Besides, you raised the same question in different forms two months ago and
earlier than that as well, and various others responded to you.


On May 21, 2017 11:10 AM, "Kalyan" <kalyan_kg at yahoo.com> wrote:

I am amused Vidyasankar. How could your warning have come sooner when I
write only occasionally on the list?

I think this list is a coterie, but I have no plans to quit on my own since
I am only an occasional participant.

Now moving on to your answer to my main question- If I know myself as
nirvishesha Atman, I am no longer an ignoramus. But who was I before I
gained this knowledge? Wasn't I the Atman? Isn't the Atman then the biggest
ignoramus?

Moreover, you and I are both the One and same Atman. Why does my knowledge
automatically not lead to your knowledge? After all, being the same entity,
we both sink and swim together. Why do we both have to separately strive
for liberation?

Best Regards
Kalyan
