+++
title = "171 srikanta at nie.ac.in"
date = "2008-05-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020178.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-May/020178.html)

This is with reference to the above topic.The bimba and the pratibimba
vada is brought from the point of view of a logician.In Adwaita,there is
no bimba or pratibimba.The one reality(Brahman)appears as multiple due to
the upadhi Bheda,just like sky(akasha)in different pots.For this,the maya
concept is brought in.There is another view which is called "avaccheda
vada"just as a small pot which is in a pond of water is filled with
water,and if it is dragged along the same  water in the pond,the water in
the pot also moves with the water in the pond.This seems to be a more
probable explanation.Shankara speaks of both the views in his bhashyas.
However,from the dwaita point of view,both the bimba and the pratibimba
are true.Just as a dolls of clay are made from the clay,the God makes the
dolls just as a potter makes the dolls.He is the maker,sustainer and the
dissolutioner of the dolls.The dolls cannot become the potter,just as the
slave cannot become the Master.However,the sruthi texts contradict this
explanation.The sruthi says"Anena jivena atmana anupravishya namarupam
vyakaravani","Vacarambhana namadeyam mrttiketaiva satyam","Yatra hi
dwaitamiva bhavati taditara itaram pashyati,yatra tu asya sarvatmaivabhut
tat kena kam pasyet" "Neha nanasti kincana",In Vishnusaharanama,"Eko
Vishnu mahatbhutam prtagbhutanyanekashah","Sa bahyantaropyajah"etc.
Both the Saishwara vadins(like Yoga,Nyaya) and the Nireeshwara vadins like
 Sankhyans,Kanada are dualists(Dwaitins)(Vaisheshika).
                                                        N.Srikanta.



