+++
title = "03 Anbu sivam2"
date = "2009-11-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-November/023075.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-November/023075.html)

Sivaanandalahari - 6 (continued -2)Brahma nishtaas who have known this
rahasyam ceaselessly do Easwaradhyaanam. Our Bhaashyakkaara says ‘mukthaa
api leelayaa vigraham kruthvaa bhajanthe’. Even those who have attained
Mukthi (note the word ‘api’ that emphasizes this) do poojanam of the mangala
vigraham of Parameswara. Doing Bhagavat Bhakthi is a swaabhaavika lakshanam
of Mukthaas. This is indicated by the word ‘leelayaa’. Aachaaryaal describes
‘leelayaa’ as “leelayaa, hEthunaa na thu bhaddhajeevavath, karmahethunaa,
vigraham, kruthvaa, swayamEva dhEham dhruthvaa
saayujyaadhimukthimanaadruthya bhajantheethi.” That is, it is not like the
bhakthajeevas that they take a sareeram according to their poorva karma
(which always happens by karthuraagnayaa) and do the bhajanam but of their
own accord (swayam sankalpam) they do this in order to swim like the swans
in Amrithasaras.

Thus this sloka lays stress on Easwara Bhakthi as the most superior one and
that every mumukshu should completely shun the dhus-tharkam which causes the
wasting of the precious life just like the frog that was caught in the
terrible mouth of the poisonous teeth of a snake, unaware of its imminent
death was trying to catch a fly that was passingby! ‘Samsaara
sarpadhashtaanaam janthoonaam avivEkinaam| Chandrasekhara Paadhaabhja
smaraNam paramoushadham|| To those praaNis who are bitten by the samsaara
sarpam that causes punarapi jananam, punarapi maranam, only the ocean of
mercy Sri Chandrasekhara (My crores of saashtaanga namaskaarams to our
ParamaachaaryaaL Sri Chandrasekhara Saraswathi SwaamigaL) remains as the
great aushadham to this halaahala visham of the snake of samsaara. So let us
all resolve to do Shivadhyaanam always.

Aum Namasivaaya|

