+++
title = "101 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2007-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-September/019403.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-September/019403.html)

Namste:

  There is a shloka pertaining to trdaNDa sa.nnyasa in manusmR^iti -


  vaagdaNDo.atha manodaNDaH kaayadaNDastathaiva cha |
  yasyaite nihitaa buddhau tridaNDiiti sa uchyate || manu. 12.10||

Meaning - That man is called a tridandin in whose mind these three, the control over his speech (vaagdaNDa), the control over his thoughts (manodaNDa), and the control over his body (kaayaadaNDa), are firmly tied together using intellegance.

  AFAK - These type of sa.nnyaasii's do not have to get rid of shiikkhaa, suutra and kacchha.  They can reenter gR^ihasta aashrama any time.  In mahabharat at the time of subhadraaharaNa arjuna embraced tridaNDi sa.nnyaasa at the recommendation of kR^iShNa.  Thus arjuna managed to stay in the city of dvaarakaa for four months.

  In Bhddha literature this is referenced as "tedaNDika".

  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu

Prasad Ramamurthy Kadambi <kaupeenavanta at gmail.com> wrote:
  Namaste,

On 9/19/07, K.Sankarasubramanian(Finance/TVS-E) <
k.sankarasubramanian at tvs-e.in> wrote:
>
> I have a question to ask on Advaitin..
>
> I understand that the Advaita saints are also called "Eka Dandi", which
> means that, they have a single Dhandam (stick) representing Athman &
> Bhraman are one and the same
>
> Does it mean that Dwvaita saints always hold two Dhandams (stick)
> jointly in their hands on the principles of dwaitha?



Well, not sure with dvaita saints, but all vishishtAdvaita saints have
tridanda (3 sticks).


Prasad Kadambi

-- 
Adi Shankara on devotion in VishnuShatpadi !!

सत्यपि भेदापगमे नाथ तवाहं न मामकीनस्त्वम् !
सामुद्रो हि तरङ्गः क्कचन समुद्रो न तरङ्गः !!

"Even when there is no distinction between us, O Lord, I am yours and not
You mine, for the wave is of the ocean and ocean is never of the wave".
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
Tonight's top picks. What will you watch tonight? Preview the hottest shows on Yahoo! TV.    

