+++
title = "45 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2008-10-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-October/020816.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-October/020816.html)




praNAms Sri Sadananda prabhuji
Hare Krishna

I dont think doing or skipping one's own nitya karma is an individual
choice...These are injunctions enshrined in our smruti & shruti
texts..Hence there is no *other* choice but to adhere to one's own dharma
(svadharmE nidhanaM shrEyaH..are the words of krishna in gIta)

I am really surprised to see your somewhat resentful comments on the
procedure of poojA vidhAna...Here it is from your below mail :

// quote //
Personally I have no desire for ritualism and I get bored watching the
process - I will be just watching the whole scene as part of His vibhuuti -
wondering the intelligence behind it - the puja, the abhishekam, the
pujaari doing his things (taking water here and pouring water there, all
that mechanics) and spectators not knowing what all that means just
admiring as the part of the routine – the whole scene - Why abhishekam with
those particular items, and then cleaning the idol and decorating it with
all the flowers etc. and everybody admiring the beauty of the Lord after
all the decoration – then aarati - and of course the prasaadam and leave.
Most of the puja follows aagama shaastra and most of the time it is done
mechanical since it is prescribed - at least that is what it appears to me.
Hopefully people are peaceful during that time and recognize the role of
the Lord in day to day life. They may have big list of what they want from
the Lord for doing that puja. Of course who else can give other than the
Lord?

// unquote//

Kindly note, not only poojAri (priest) takes water here & pours there
(perhaps you may be referring arghya, pAdya, Achamana, shuddhOdaka snAnaM
etc. in devatArchana), even jagadguru of shrungeri does this *pouring*
activity while performing chandramouLishwara pooja at shArada peeTaM...IMO,
saying 'vedic injuction (vidhi-s) such as nitya karma, devatArchana etc is
a *boring* activity is not a wise assertion from the follower of vEda
dharma. Anyway, you are welcome to have your opinion on these vedic rituals
& respect your decision to sit for meditation instead of doing *boring*
pooja.

Thanks onceagain for your comments prabhuji.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar


Bhaskarji - PraNAms

Just my opinion.

If you examine your question, you will find the answer yourself.

Is one substitute for the other - it depends on the individual. Even the so
called japa, bhajans and naama sankeerthana also can become mechanical.

Suppose one asks do I need to do high school before I enter into medicine.
It depends on the qualification of the person. If I already have all the
prerequisites then it is useless for me to go to high school again since
the purpose of high school is only to provide me those prerequisites. The
one who has the saadhana sampatti then one can do, as Br. Sutra 1 says
athaato brahma jignaasa - then therefore inquire into Brahman - for -then -
shankara spends considerable amount of discussion about qualifications and
answers the question you posed - does one have to do rituals or veda
karmakaanDa.

Who is going to decide who has the requisite qualifications for the inquiry
into Brahman? If one tries to do Vedantic meditation, that is inquiry into
the nature of reality using shastra pramaana, and if the mind is not able
to do, then he requires chitta suddhi – He needs to take few steps back -
until the mind is able to detach itself for the inquiry - hence karmayoga
and that includes pachabhuuta yagnas are important for that mind to be able
to detach. If the mind can inquire steadily, then the purpose of all other
purification rites are fulfilled. No need to do other than to teach others.


Therefore should one do or not do - is an incorrect question. It depends on
the qualification of the student.

Personally I have no desire for ritualism and I get bored watching the
process - I will be just watching the whole scene as part of His vibhuuti -
wondering the intelligence behind it - the puja, the abhishekam, the
pujaari doing his things (taking water here and pouring water there, all
that mechanics) and spectators not knowing what all that means just
admiring as the part of the routine – the whole scene - Why abhishekam with
those particular items, and then cleaning the idol and decorating it with
all the flowers etc. and everybody admiring the beauty of the Lord after
all the decoration – then aarati - and of course the prasaadam and leave.
Most of the puja follows aagama shaastra and most of the time it is done
mechanical since it is prescribed - at least that is what it appears to me.
Hopefully people are peaceful during that time and recognize the role of
the Lord in day to day life. They may have big list of what they want from
the Lord
for doing that puja. Of course who else can give other than the Lord?

Personally I prefer to sit quitely in one corner or in a lounge and do
Vedantic meditation. I used to do regular japa and sit for meditation - Now
I do not do that either - since even japa became more a distraction. I can
just get lost in admiring the beauty of the Lord present whereever I look.
There is a beautiful sloka that says - wherever my eyes go oh my Lord, let
me see your lotus feet there.

Then doing or not doing the rituals etc, including japa and naaama
sankeertana or Bhajans become least relevant. I prefer to see the Lord
everywhere (of course in the temple too)and do my own ritual in admiration
of His omnipresence and beautiful manefestations. It becomes a problme if I
have to do ritual since my wife wants - then that becomes my obligatory
duty! I do it then to keep my peace - since Lord is there too and in the
people who are participating in that puja. Only scence change for variety.
But of course when Laddu is available right in front why go all the way
miles for a shop to get that Laddu? For a variety that is OK, once in away!

Hari Om!
Sadananda
