+++
title = "226 Ramakrishna Upadrasta"
date = "2010-11-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025914.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/025914.html)

OM shrii gurubhyo namaH
Namaste,

We continue with the series.

68. yathaa cha saattvikaadipurushhaH sattvaadikaaryaaNi aatmaanaM
prati prakaashya nivR^ittaani kaa~Nxati\, na tathaa guNaatiito
nivR^ittaani kaa~Nxati ityarthaH | etat.h na parapratyaxaM li~Ngam.h |
kiM tarhi\? svaatmapratyaxatvaat.h aatmavishhayameva etat.h laxaNam.h
| na hi svaatmavishhayaM dveshhamaakaa~NxaaM vaa paraH pashyati ||
14.22 ||

##Unlike a person having sattva etc. who longs for the effects of
sattva etc. which withdraw themselves after becoming manifest to him,
the person who has gone beyond the qualities na kaaNxati, does not
long for them in that way, nivrittani, when the disappear. This is the
idea.

This is not an indication that can be perceived by others. What then?
Since this characteristic is perceivable to oneself, it is merely
subjective. For dislike or longing, which is a subjective experience
of a person, is not seen by another.##

69. xetraxetrayoH vishhayavishhayiNoH bhinnasvabhaavayoH
itaretarataddharmaadhyaasa\- laxaNaH saMyogaH
xetraxetraj~nasvaruupavivekaabhaavanibandhanaH\, rajjushuktikaadiinaaM
tadvivekaj~naanaabhaavaat.h adhyaaropitasarparajataadisaMyogavat.h |
saH ayaM adhyaasasvaruupaH xetraxetraj~nayoH saMyogaH
mithyaaj~naanalaxaNaH || ##(##
brahmasuutrabhaashhyasthaadhyaasabhaashhya gatavaakyaanukaari vaakyam
##)## || 13.26 ||

##[Objection: What is meant by this 'association of the field, and the
Knower of the field'?

Reply: The answer is:] The association of the field and the Knower of
the field -- which are the object and the subject, respectively, and
are of different natures -- is in the form of superimposition of each
of the other as also of their qualities, as a consequence of the
absence of discrimination between the real natures of the field and
the Knower of the field. This is like association of a rope, nacre,
etc. with the superimposed snake, silver, etc. owing to the absence of
discrimination between them. This association of the field and the
Knower of the field in the form of superimposition is described as
false knowledge.
##

(To be continued.)
bhava sha~nkara deshika me sharaNaM
Ramakrishna

