+++
title = "414 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2017-07-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-July/046079.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-July/046079.html)

In connection with the birth Centenary Year of our Jyeshta
Mahasannidhanam, His Holiness Jagadguru Sri Abhinava Vidyatheertha
Mahaswamiji, by His infinite Grace a 3D Holographic Video presentation on
the Jagadguru was inaugurated today morning by Their Holinesses Jagadguru
Sri Bharathi Theertha Mahaswamiji, Mahasannidhanam and Jagadguru Sri
Vidhushekhara Bharati Mahaswamiji, Sannidhanam, at Sacchidananda Vilas,
Sringeri, in the presence of the Administrator and CEO of the Math Sri V.R
Gowrishankar. Their Holinesses were immensely pleased with the 3D
Holography on Jyeshta Mahasannidhanam and showered their choicest blessings
on Sri Vidyashankar Krishnan of MM Forgings Ltd, Chennai who had brought
out the said video presentation.

In the afternoon, Sri VR Gowrishankar, Administrator, inaugurated the
Holographic Presentation for public view at the Pravachana Mandiram,
Sringeri amidst devotees who had assembled there. He also released two
pamphlets for distribution to public during the Video presentation and
wished that all those who come to the Math for darshan watch the
presentation and earn the grace of the Jagadguru Sri Abhinava Vidyatheertha
Mahaswamiji, the 35th Shankaracharya of the Peetham during His birth
centenary.

The 20-minute 3D holographic presentation is in two languages, English and
Kannada and covers rare video footages showing Jyeshtha Mahasannidhanam in
Nirvikalpa samadhi, perform His Japa, deliver a short lecture and perform
Sri Chandramoulesswara Puja.

The presentation is now available for public view at the Pravachana
Mandiram starting from today and devotees can view it as per the timings
published in the notice board kept outside the hall. Devotees who watched
the presentation today in batches were heard saying that they felt as if
they actually had the darshan of Jyeshta Mahasannidhanam.

(Message from Sridhar who was in Sringeri yesterday.)

While you can view the presentation on your visit to Sringeri, please
inform your friends and relatives visiting Sringeri about this.

Om Tat Sat
