+++
title = "28 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2018-11-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050914.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2018-November/050914.html)

Namaste

Someone forwarded the following 'quiz' on Diwali.  I thought of sharing it
with this forum as many aspects of this 'quiz' concern names, texts,
traditions, etc. that will be of interest to scholars here, especially
since there are many from all over the country/world.  Scholars may also
point out errors if any in this compilation.

warm regards
subrahmanian.v

QUIZ ON DIWALI

Luckily the Supreme Court of India has not imposed any restriction on Quiz
during Diwali. So let us have some fun….

Note: This quiz is not a test on your IQ but more of 'sharing some rare /
useful information’, so, for a change,  the answers are also mentioned
below each Quiz question.

The first question has to be necessarily  on crackers. Let us get going.

1.Sivakasi, since 1940s, has become the 'fireworks capital' of India. Which
city was the first to start manufacture of crackers in India?

Ans: Kolkata. It was by one Mr. Dasgupta in 1892. The Bengal light (flower
pot), which is still popular, was the first firework manufactured followed
by coloured matchsticks.

2.Bursting of crackers has been popular in India since Vedic times. The Rig
veda calls it Agni upasana. The Sanskrit sloka Ulka danam refers to the
compulsory bursting of crackers during Diwali. Who was the composer of this
sloka?

Ans: Ved Vyas.

3.Diwali is also known by various names such as Deepavali, Dipalika, Deepa
Oli, Deepamala etc. By what name was it known in ancient Kashmir?

Ans: Sukasuptika.

4. Both the incidents associated with Diwali, (a) return of Lord Rama to
Ayodhya and (b) killing of Narakasura are not accurately documented as to
give us the exact date / year of the start of festival of Diwali. But
according to a certain text 15th October 527 BCE is reckoned as the oldest
instance of lighting of lamps (diyas) on the Diwali day. Name the book.

Ans: Tilyapannatti written by the Jain monk Yativrsabha.

5.How is the place Pawapuri, near Nalanda, Bihar associated with the
festival of lights?

Ans: Mahavira, the last of the twenty-four Tirthankara attained Nirvana or
moksha (liberation) at Pawapuri. Jains celebrate Diwali to commemorate this
event.

6.It is popularly believed that Lord Krishna killed Narakasura. But in the
battle between the two, it was Narakasura who held the upper hand, severely
wounding Krishna and making him unconscious. It was actually Narakasura’s
mother who killed him. True or false?

Ans. True. Naraka was actually killed by Satyabhama, wife and charioteer of
Lord Krishna. She is considered to be a reincarnation of Bhoomadevi, mother
of Naraka.

7.Among the dashavatar  of Lord Vishnu which avatar is considered to be
the father of Narakasura?.

Ans:  Varaha.

(There is another view that he was born to Hiranyaksha and Bhuma devi when
the demon embraced the later - but that is disputed)

8.The Tamils refer  to the tradition of taking of oil bath on Diwali
morning as 'Ganga snanam’? What is the reason behind it?

Ans : After the battle with Narakasura,  Lord Krishna cleansed His body
splashed with blood, with an oil bath at the Ganges. Thus the tradition of
'Ganga snanam’ began.It is believed that Ganga snanam on Diwali day
cleanses all dirts (impurities) both inside and outside our body.

9.In Bengal, on the night of Diwali, Maa Kali is worshipped and the
festival is known as Kali puja. Who are the two associates of the goddess
who are also worshipped during Kali puja?

Ans: Dakini and Yogini.

10. Maa Kali in Bengal, Lakshmi (with Kuber) in western India, Govardhan
and Vishwakarma in the north are worshipped during Diwali. On what day is
Lord Yamraj worshipped during Diwali?

Ans: On the Yam trayodashi (dhanteras) day.

11. Lord Yama again. Bhai Dooj or Bhai Phonta is celebrated two days after
Diwali.  Lord Yama is believed to have started this practice when he
visited his twin sister. What is the name of Yama’s twin sister?

Ans: Yami.(Is it not Yamuna?-MN)

12. In certain parts of India, playing cards (gambling) is considered to be
an important part of Diwali. What is the origin of this practice?

Ans: On this day the Ardhanari form of God, split into two and  Parvati
played dice with her husband Lord Shiva (a scene superbly sculpted at
Kailash temple, Ellora). She won the game and decreed that whosoever
gambled on Diwali night would prosper throughout the ensuing year.

13. By what name Vatsyayana, the author of  Kama Sutra, refers to the
festival of lights in his book?

Ans: It is called “Yaksha Ratri” or the Night of the Yakshas.

14. The Sikhs celebrate Diwali by calling it Bandi Chod Diwas - day of
release from captivity  of one of their gurus. Name the Guru who was
released this day.

Ans: The 6th Guru, Guru Hargobind, who was first arrested and later
released by Mughal emperor Jahangir.

15.In which part of India Diwali is celebrated during the spring season
(similar to Basanta Navratri)?

scroll down….

further….

Ans: That was a tricky one. There is no such thing as Basanta Diwali.
Diwali comes just once a year.

Hope you enjoyed the Quiz.  Happy and a very prosperous Diwali to you and
your family.

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups
"भारतीयविद्वत्परिषत्" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an
email to bvparishat+unsubscribe at googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to bvparishat at googlegroups.com.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.
