+++
title = "296 Venkatesh Murthy"
date = "2017-06-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-June/045727.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-June/045727.html)

Namaste
OTOH some people have Purva Janma memories and they can prove many things.
They will remember details like who were the parents, wife and children and
they can give proof. There is a novel by SL Bhyrappa - Naayi Neralu. A man
goes back to his Purva Janma parents, wife and daughter. The parents and
wife accept him but daughter will not because she is not convinced. My
friend said there is also one American movie like this on reincarnation.

If memory is not accepted there will be problem in court cases because a
witness is giving statement from his memory only of what he has seen.

On Tue, Jun 27, 2017 at 10:00 AM, Venkatraghavan S via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> Namaste Vidyasankar ji,
> Thanks for bringing this up. Although the false memory syndrome is
> generally associated with traumatic events that have been imagined, if the
> general principle - that one need not have experienced something for its
> recollection - holds good, then I wonder what stops one from declaring that
> "sukham aham asvApsam" memory from deep sleep is also just a post hoc
> rationalisation?
>
> Of course shAstra says thus, but if one's own anubhava is being denied
> prAmANya, what to talk of shAstra pramANa?
>
> Regards,
> Venkatraghavan
>
> On 26 Jun 2017 8:40 p.m., "Vidyasankar Sundaresan via Advaita-l" <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>
> > To bring this discussion to a contemporary relevance, do read up on
> "false
> > memory syndrome" and how it is often a result of the so-called "recovered
> > memory therapy." Although our philosophical texts all more or less agree
> > that smRti can only be of things that have been actually experienced in
> the
> > past, there is mounting evidence that not only can the human recovery of
> a
> > past event be faulty in its process, but that a past event need not have
> > even taken place and yet people sometimes "recollect" a memory of
> > something.
> >
> > Vidyasankar
> >
> > On Mon, Jun 26, 2017 at 11:46 AM, Venkatraghavan S via Advaita-l <
> > advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> >
> > > Knowledge's validity is not because it is generated by pramANa, its
> > > validity derives from it not being subsequently sublated. On the
> > contrary,
> > > one of the conditions for means to be pramANa is that it produces
> pramA.
> > >
> > > If the original knowledge was pramA when it was stored in memory, and
> > > provided that it is recollected correctly, the memory is a valid
> > > recollection of events that occurred in the past. One need not
> postulate
> > > memory being a valid pramANa for it to produce an accurate recollection
> > of
> > > the past.
> > >
> > > Regards,
> > > Venkatraghavan
> > >
> > _______________________________________________
> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >
> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >
> > For assistance, contact:
> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> >
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>



-- 
Regards

-Venkatesh
