+++
title = "37 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2005-05-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-May/014598.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-May/014598.html)

Hi,



I am Swamy Sripada, who have recently opted to be included in your
Mailing List.

I am from a traditional Brahmin family with equally traditional lineage
with the respect and regard to the tradition still continuing in the
family.

My great grandfather (Sripada Viswanatha Sastry) was a great Sanskrit
scholar and he had written some books in Sanskrit on the subject of
philosophy. He was a practical philosopher who remained a house-holder
cum saint.

My Grandfather ( Sripada Someswara Sastry) was a great astrologer who
learned the art in Benares for 40 years and had been throughout his life
dedicated to the great art with distinguished people visiting him. He
was also a great Sanskrit scholar.

My Father (Sripada Satyanarayana Murty)  is a teacher by profession. He
used to teach Sanskrit and later Sciences and retired 3 years back as
headmaster. He has a deep interest in spirituality and Hindu traditions
from his childhood. He performs daily Japa for longer hours and is a
voracious reader of many spiritual books even today. The collection in
our house has many of  the works ( many of them in Sanskrit also)  of
Sankara, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Vivekananda, Ramana Maharshi etc.,,
and my mother is also a post graduate with a devotional bent and she
along with my father worship God daily for longer hours.

I am fortunate to be born to such pious couple and because of them right
from my childhood I had an inclination to spiritual literature as well
as life. As a result along with the formal education I was constantly in
touch with all the related literature as even today go through the books
whenever I get time apart from my working hours. I am presently working
in software field and even regularly browse the net to look for
spiritual material. I am particularly interested in the works of Sankara
and Swami Vivekananda both of whom are role models for the younger
generation for a highly packed perfected Life.

I am married and am staying with my wife and parents in Hyderabad

Please join me in the group so that I can share the spiritual treasure
passed on to so many seekers from the great seers of Hinduism.

Regards,

Swamy.


