+++
title = "189 Srikrishna Ghadiyaram"
date = "2002-05-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-May/002923.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-May/002923.html)

Hari Om !!

I am very much interested in knowing if any of you
have seen an English or Telugu translation of the
commentary of Sridhara Swami on Srimad Bhagavatam.
(The original Sanskrit commentary is available at
Motilal Banarsidas book store). I understand that this
is the most accepted and acclaimed Advaitic
interpretation of Srimad Bhagavatam. Even Srila
Prabhupada (vehimently opposed to Advaita) in his
translation refers to Sridhara Swami's commentary.


--- Ravishankar Venkatraman <sunlike at HOTMAIL.COM>
wrote:


<P>Sri Jayandra Saraswati swamiji is answering some
questions on joint family, Sri Sukha Maharishi (a
small typo is there in web page) and so on. His
Holiness mentions that Sukha was one of the real
Jnanis we can see, and He says that Sri Bhagavatham
was narrated by such a Jnani to the King Pariksit. He
holds that SB is very important for Sanyasis, because
it was narrated by Sukha Brahmam, an ultimate Jnani.
That may answer some of Sri Venkartaramani's
questions.</P>

I believe the correct name is Suka Maharshi (and not
Sukha Maharshi). SUKA in sanskrit means Parrot.

Interestingly, I heard that Sridhara Swami was in his
previous birth a parrot of Radha. So, he knows all
that has happened, and so his commentary is very
authentic. Do you like it ???? !!!!

Om Namo Narayanaya !!

Srikrishna

__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
LAUNCH - Your Yahoo! Music Experience
http://launch.yahoo.com

