+++
title = "342 Anand Hudli"
date = "2012-03-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031313.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031313.html)

Shri Ramesh Krishnamurthy wrote:

>P: Ishvara is karma-phala-dAtA.
>Q: Ishvara is not karma-phala-dAtA

>Now, even though P and Q have different conceptions of Ishvara, if
>they execute the same prayoga in the same manner and under the same
>conditions, they will get the same result. P may still maintain that
>the phala was given by Ishvara to both P and Q, and Q may have a
>different opinion, but this is orthogonal to the the execution of the
>prayoga and the receipt of its phala.

This may be correct from a strictly "transactional" point of view with
a focus on the result, where the upAsaka thinks he is just
"transacting" with a upAsana, which is nothing more than a ritual. As
long as he keeps
 doing the ritual correctly, he keeps getting the result. However, at
least at some point, the upAsaka has to rise above this purely
transactional view and ask the question, "Who/What is the power that
rewards the
result?" If this question is not asked, then as per the gItA, the
upAsaka is likely to get trapped in a cycle of performing kAmya karma,
where the focus is on the result. Why is it a trap? Desires are
endless. Today,
I have a desire for wealth and I may undertake upAsana of a certain
deity to get that wealth. Tomorrow, I may desire something else and
undertake the upAsana of another deity. Where is the end to desires?

 If there indeed is a power that gives the result,  would it not be
far more appropriate to worship that power *directly*, without
focusing on the result? This is what gItA says.

Anand

