+++
title = "157 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2012-07-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-July/032495.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-July/032495.html)

On Thu, Jul 12, 2012 at 2:13 PM, Venkata sriram P
<venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>wrote:

>
> //
> By the way Panchakshari is नमश्शिवाय only. It does not contain Om.
> We add it. Perhaps non-vedic in origin.
>
> //
>
> Even gAyatri doesn't have praNava in rg veda.  Then why do we chant with
> praNava.
> Moreover, what is meant by *non-vedic origin*.  Is not this mantra present
> in
> shatarudriya.
>

 Do you know that these portions are reffered to as Taamasic srutis by
Vaishnavas?

>
> Statements like the above shows your respect towards our shAstrAs.
>
> //
>

Yes. I do not have much respect for sastras  whose expiry date
is over. I think I am sensible. Absolutely no regrets.


> If some people want to live in their make believe worlds
> nobody can prevent them. But ultimately they have to be
> ready for the disillusionment and disappointment
>
> //


> Let me tell you frankly that it is the people especially the so-called
> english educated brAhmaNAs who are detrimental to the
> sanAtana dharma which is quite evident from your statement.
>

There is no dharma which is time proof. Dharma depends desa ,kala
and deha dharma. Dharma in India has changed innumerable times ( Manu to
Parasara). It cannot be kept rigid. It is changing even now.  It will
change in
future also. Thank you for the unintended compliment you paid by calling me
detrimental to Sanatana Dharma.

-- 
regards,
Sarma.


 sriram

>
>
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

