+++
title = "18 Venkatesh Murthy via Advaita-l"
date = "2014-05-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-May/037010.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-May/037010.html)

Namaste
On Mon, May 5, 2014 at 8:57 PM, Vidyasankar Sundaresan via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> In the tryambakaM yajAmahe mantra, in addition to mRtyor (pancamI
> vibhakti), you also have amRtAt, which is also in pancamI.  A superficial
> reading would therefore indicate that mRtyu is amRta. Would there be a
> problem with that as well, in terms of meaning?
>
Tryamabakam Mantra is not at all part of Namaka but I think it was added
later. The actual wording is Mrutyor Muksheeya Maa Amrutaat. Maa means do
not. I have to pray Tryambaka to liberate me from Death Mrutyu but do not
liberate me from Amruta Immortality. I should be liberated from Death. But
what is guarantee I will be liberated permanently? Any thing born must die.
I have to be liberated from birth and death both. I have to be Immortal.
This is the meaning.



>
> Rule no. 1 with understanding veda mantra-s: Do not expect that standard
> grammar rules apply in a straightforward manner.
>
> Another mantra example: UrdhvaretaM virUpAkshaM viSvarUpAya vai namaH,
> which also does not conform to grammar expectations.
>
> TaittirIya upanishat examples: shIkshAM vyAkhyAsyAmaH (The word SikshA is
> normally with short i-kAra, but upanishat has dIrgha I instead) and
> ASishTho dR^iDhishTho balishThaH. Classical grammar rules dictate that the
> word should be draDhishTha, with the use of a full repha.
>
> There are many more examples where the veda has word forms that don't
> conform to grammar, either in vibhakti or in internal/external sandhi or in
> other aspects of word/sentence construction and usage. We just have to take
> them as they are. And marvel at the fact that they have been preserved in
> the transmission tradition, without getting "corrected" by standard
> expectations generated by the demands of grammar.
>
> Best regards,
> Vidyasankar
>
> > > On 05-May-2014, at 3:45 pm, Venkatesh Murthy via Advaita-l <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> > >
> > > Namaste
> > >
> > > That is not correct. Because if I am praying to Death itself the words
> will
> > > be Mrutyo Me Paahi, not Mrutyur Me Paahi. Mrutyo is the Sambodhanaa for
> > > Mrutyu.
> > >
> > > If you look at another very near mantra Tryambakam Yajaamahe you will
> see
> > > it is saying Mrutyor Muksheeya. Liberate me from Death.
> > >
> > > According to that Mantra also the grammatical form should be Om Namo
> > > Bhagavate Rudraaya Vishnave Mrutyor Me Paahi.
> > >
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>



-- 
Regards

-Venkatesh

