+++
title = "115 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2012-08-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-August/032805.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-August/032805.html)

Any other authentic information directly from the Geologist will be
appreciated.

-- 
regards,
Sarma.

On Fri, Aug 17, 2012 at 2:17 AM, viji sridhar <vijisri26 at yahoo.com> wrote:

>
>
> Hello friends,
> I came across this interesting article about Adi Sankara and thought to
> share it with all my friends here.
> Thanks.
>
> There has been lots of controversy whether Adi Sankara was born in 780 AD
> or 509 BC with various historical evidence being exchanged both for and
> against each of the dates. A striking scientific proof in favour of the BC
> theory was provided by the 68th pontiff of The Kanchi Kamakoti Peetam, Sri
> Chandrasekharendra Saraswati (affectionately called as the Paramacharya)
> himself.
>
> History says that as Sankara's mother was finding difficulty to go the the
> River Purna (Presently called as River Periyar) to take bath,
> so Sankara requested the River Purna to divert and follow his footsteps
> (Kal-adi) to flow near his anscestral house to enable his mother to take
> bath without any difficulty and then later join again to the main course of
> the river.
>
> One day a very reputed Geologist happened to visit Kanchipuram to take
> darshan of the Paramacharya. After enquiring about his family, the
> Paramacharya requested him arrange for a diver to dive and take out sand
> from two different locations of the River Purna. One location should be
> when the River Purna enters Kerala, before it diverts into entering Kaladi
> and the other location to be at Kaladi itself. Later Paramacharya asked him
> to use the technique of carbon dating to find out the age of the sand from
> these two locations. The geologist performed the exercise as instructed by
> the Paramacharya and provided the results which was that the sand from the
> first location yielded an age of being more than 100,000 years old whereas
> the age of the sand from the second location in Kaladi was close to about
> 2500 years.
>
>
> The Age of the River sand at Kaladi confirmed that the River got diverted
> about 2,500 years back and thus again, Adi Sankara was indeed born in BC,
> which should be 509BC as per majority of the Sankaracharya mutts.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

