+++
title = "206 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-01-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/044067.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/044067.html)

I think the points raised by SSS on the two bhashyas of Sankara on
Kenopanishad
deserve careful looking into. After all a great commentator like sankara is
not likely
to contradict himself.

regards,
Sarma.

On Sun, Jan 15, 2017 at 10:23 AM, Sunil Bhattacharjya via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

> Dear Vidyasankarji,
>
> I admire your very critical look at things.  From you mail it is clear
> that you are not convinced in Keshav kshmiri Bhattacharya being the 33rd
> Nimbarkacharya. I would have been happy if  you would have told us as to
> what you think about the date of Suka, the guru of Gaudapadacharya. I am
> reminding you lest you have overlooked that
>
> Regards,
> Sunil KB
>
>
> --------------------------------------------
> On Sat, 1/14/17, Vidyasankar Sundaresan <svidyasankar at gmail.com> wrote:
>
>  Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] [advaitin] Paper on Kenopanishad
>  To: "Sunil Bhattacharjya" <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
>  Cc: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
> vedanta.org>, "yahoogroups" <advaitin at yahoogroups.com>
>  Date: Saturday, January 14, 2017, 6:20 PM
>
>  On Jan 14, 2017
>  2:41 PM, "Sunil Bhattacharjya" <sunil_bhattacharjya at yahoo.com>
>  wrote:
>  Dear
>  Vidyashankarji,
>
>
>
>  Like the Avogadro's Hypothesis in science, the
>  hypothesis that Adi Shankara wrote sixteen (16) bhashyas may
>  stand tall, particularly because  the Brihat Shankara
>  Vijaya as well as the work of Shri Vidyaranya combined with
>  commentary on it says so, until someone gives another proven
>  figure to contest that.
>
>  Till I see credible reports of
>  actual manuscripts of this so called bRhacchankaravijaya
>  having been found, I'll be extremely skeptical, even
>  dismissive, of arbitrary claims conveniently attributed to
>  that text. Whatever flights of fancy you choose to believe
>  is your problem sir. Please do not expect everyone else to
>  subscribe to the same fancy!
>
>
>
>  Kindly permit me to say that I have no reason to believe
>  that  there have been people  all around, who have been
>  conspiring against the Sringeri
>  math.
>  This statement of yours is so
>  laughable as to not deserve any response, so I'm not
>  going to give you one. I just wonder how some generic doubt
>  about authorship of one or the other text becomes an issue
>  about the Sringeri lineage in your mind! There is no
>  connection at all that anybody else can see, but please,
>  have at it. I'm done, trying to respond sensibly to your
>  latest round of desperate attempts in this
>  misdirection.
>  Best
>  regards,Vidyasankar
>
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>
