+++
title = "197 shriharsha chatra"
date = "2012-08-21"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-August/032875.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-August/032875.html)

Thank you members for your insightful replies. But the answers rendered me
with one more question, i.e of Ishvara, and Brahman.
What I want to know is does Savikalpa leads to Ishvara Jnana, and
Nirvikalpa is a true Brahman Sakshatkara.

Thank you again.

Shriharsha

On Tue, Aug 21, 2012 at 8:08 AM, श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:

> On Tue, Aug 21, 2012 at 3:41 PM, V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com
> >wrote:
>
> > Is not vikalpa also, in yet another context,  'options/alternatives'?
>  Eg:
> > एवम् उत अनेवम् इति द्वेधा विकल्प्य...For a samshaya/doubt, it is said
> there
> > should be minimum two alternatives: 'this or that'?
> >
>
> A word may have many meanings according to lexicon, etc. But, the best
> suited is applied according to prakaraNam.
> So, yes the word vikalpa means option also. But, it only means visheShaNam
> when we talk of GYAnam.
>
>
> > > nirvikalpaka-GYAnam means an experience which illuminates just the
> thing
> > > and not it's attributes.
> > >
> >
> > I have heard that this is also called 'अनुव्यवसायः’.  Will you kindly
> > explain this term for more clarity?
> >
>
> For utter clarity nirvikalpaka-GYAnam and anuvyavasAya are very different.
> While the first is already defined here, let me say something about
> anuvyavasAya.
> anuvyavasAya is equivalent to sAxI-GYAnam of vedAntin-s. It is simply the
> experience of experience.
> For example :
> The vR^itti - 'this is pot' which is generated by eyes after its contact
> with a pot is called vyavasAya.
> After that their arises another vR^itti in shape of "I know that this is a
> pot" OR "I know the pot" OR "I'm the knower of pot" which is termed as
> anuvyavasAya by tArkika-s.
>
>
>  > When vedAntin-s talk about nirvikalpa or nirvikalpaka-GYAna of brahma as
> > > cause of liberation, they talk about this division and not otherwise as
> > is
> > > popular now by the grace of neo-vedAntin-s and hindu-missionaries.
> >
> > In Savikalpa samAdhi the dhyAna-dhyAtR-dhyeya
> > (meditation/meditator/meditated) difference is experienced.  In
> Nirvikalpa
> > samadhi this difference is transcended and the 'vastu' alone shines.
> >
> > Here is a quote from the Book 'Exalting Elucidations' of Jagadguru Sri
> > Abhinava Vidyatirtha Swamiji of Sringeri:
> >
> > Q:What is the characteristic of nirvikalpa samadhi?
> >
> > A: The absence of awareness of the distinction of the seer, the seen and
> > the act of seeing is indeed its special characteristic.  The Atman is
> > clearly perceived.  Further, supreme bliss is experienced.
>
>
> If you are trying to say that AchArya is supporting the view of
> neo-vedAntin-s. Then I've to say just this :
> As the word nirvikalpaka means both specific-GYAnam and specific-samAdhi,
> so it helped to create confusion.
> I don't say that nirvikalpaka-samAdhi is never talked in vedAnta-books. It
> is actually helpful means to control viparIta-bhAvanA and hence is
> practiced by all.
> I just mean to say that the knowledge which is termed nirvikalpaka and
> means of moxa is not same as the nirvikalpaka-samAdhi or the Atman shining
> in that state.
> I'll also like to add that such nirvikalpaka-GYAnam of brahma actually
> doesn't need nirvikalpaka-samAdhi to gain birth.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

