+++
title = "269 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2013-12-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-December/036136.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-December/036136.html)

praNAms Sri Subbu prabhuji 
Hare Krishna

>  its year end for me at office, bit busy with bread earning job:-))..so 
kindly bear with me for this curt reply. 

Actually only with  sarvajnatvaM, sarvashaktitvaM etc. Brahman (nirguNa.
Turiya) is called Ishwara (saguNa, sixth mantra of mAnDUkya - ESha
sarvajnaH...antaryAmi...).  That is the way Advaita distinguishes Brahman
from Ishwara.

>  but Ishwara is NOT different from brahman and if we are ready to accept 
Ishwara is sarvajna, I am not able to understand why not brahman?? Does 
parabrahman is inferior to Ishwara since he is lacking these qualities??!! 
OTOH, I would say,  brahman's potence (shakti) which is inherent like 
existence and jnAnaM will be active through upAdhi in srushti kriya. 
Hence, we call the parabrahman itself as sOpAdhika brahman or saguNa 
brahman to denote chetanatva behind srushti.  If we argue parabrahman is 
minus sarvashaktitvaM and sarvajnatvaM we are restricting the parabrahma 
tattva and implying that parabrahman would get sarvashaktitvaM and 
sarvajnatvaM from jadOpAdhi then become Ishwara!!. 


While attributing sarvajnatvaM, sarvashaktitvaM etc. to Brahman we see
these as taTasthalakShaNa and not svarUpalakShaNa.  'Inherent' means
svarUpa.

>  Yes, brahman's svarUpa is omnipotence, omniscience no matter whether 
'omni' is there or not !!  And this inherent shaktitva will be displayed 
through upAdhi in srushtikriya (creation) and karma phala distribution 
etc. ekO devaH sarva bhUteshu gUdAH...kevalO nirhuNascha 
....shvetAshvatara. Just like consciousness is the nature (svarUpa / 
svabhAva) of brahman shakti, knowledge etc. are the nature of brahman. 
jnAna, shakti, Ishitavya etc. are the nature (inherent) of para brahman 
and parabrahman's these inherent nature is not borrowed one from upAdhi 
when he becomes Ishwara (sOpAdhika).  To distinguish the difference 
between shakti and shaktimAn, jnAna and jnAnavAn etc, the upAdhi-s have 
been introduced and it does not anyway mean after getting upAdhi 
brahman/Ishwara  would get the power  of sarvajnatvaM and sarvashaktitvaM. 


It is essentially with a view to explain the 'everything' the shakti is
admitted.  'No shakti, no creation.'

>  Yes, no shakti means no creation but it does not mean no creation then 
brahman would remain minus shakti. To be precise, creation depends on 
Ishwara shakti but  Ishwara shakti would not vanish if creation is not 
there since shakti, jnAna, chetanatvaM etc. are inherent to brahman !! 
Hence, IMO, shakti, jnAna, consciounsness etc. are svarUpa lakshaNa ( not 
tatastha lakshaNa which is temporary)  of parabrahman which would get 
projected through upAdhi in srushti and with upAdhi (sOpAdhika) the same 
parabrahman is called saguNa, sOpAdhika, kArya brahma. 

>  We shall discuss this in detail with sUtra and itareya bhAshya. 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar 
