+++
title = "41 News & Indian Community Events"
date = "2001-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-September/001890.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-September/001890.html)

A special prayer session  organized by the Austin Indian Community

Purpose: To cope with the grief, loss, and fear generated by the World
Trade Center tragedy and its aftermath; to help us heal by chanting and
singing together.

Content: Chanting of Bhagavat Geeta Chapter 2 and bhajans led by
members of our community. Copies of Chapter 2 will be provided.
We will take donations to be given to Red Cross National Disaster
Fund (which goes towards the victims of this vicious attack).

Date and time: 23rd September, Sunday, 4 p.m. - 5 p.m.

Address: 5918, W. Courtyard Drive, Austin, TX.
Note: It is the first driveway on the right on Courtyard.

Directions: The hall is on the 3rd floor of the building - Suite # 300.
You can park in the main parking garage. Pass the skybridge/walkway
between the parking garage and the main building, and you will see the
hall on the left.

For map and driving directions, see

http://maps.yahoo.com/py/pmap.py?Pyt=Tmap&addr=5918+W.+Courtyard+dr.&city=Au
stin&state=TX&zip=&country=us&slt=30.352800&sln=-97.796200&mag=10&cs=9&name=
&desc=&BFCat=&BFClient=

Contact numbers for additional information:

Shobha and Manjunath Yedatore
Home - 512-288-3849
Cell - 293-0182

Roopa and Raghuram Belur
Home - 512-250-1585
Cell - 657-5525
======================================================
From:   The KaushiksNews & Indian Community Events (NICE).Since 1994.
Feel free to introduce  interested people to this list. Reply with REMOVE
in the subject of body of message if you wish to be removed from this list.
=====================================================


--0-792901139-1001165273=:97322--

