+++
title = "67 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2005-07-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014783.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014783.html)

FELLOW ADVAITINS,
I hesitate to answer this request, for to introduce myself to other fellow 
advaita vedanta lovers is not like how we introduce ourself to the world 
in Vyavaharik sense....So I will attempt to answer this question the best 
way I can.....I have a firm conviction and have accepted the postulate "I 
AM BRAHMAN" That is why I choose to have an Id Brahman as my email. I have 
been a seeker of truth from early childhood and have found vedanta very 
early in my life. My journey of spirituality took me to many organisations 
like radha swami, bal yogeswar, sai baba, swami chinmaya nanda mission, 
DAsnami akharas, christianity,, shringari matha, badrinarain matha,ramana 
maharish, nisargadatta mahraj, many other eastern philosopies and and 
western thoughts.The journey has been truely colurfull..I am an NRI 
.....medical doctor........with a burning desire for liberation while 
living. I have read many vedanta scriptures and continue to do so even 
now....My favorite ones are avadoota gita, astavakra sanghita, jeevanmukta 
viveka, and most writtings of Adi- Shankaracharya ji I am on a crossroad 
now ...I am looking for a brahmaleena outer Sannyasi Guru. who is 
steadfast In brahman to intiate me into sannyasa. That is why this list is 
Important to be for I have gone as far as I could have gonne as 
householder regading Brahma Gyana and now I wish to plunge into 
Sannyasa.........I wish to hear views from learned members about their 
views in Continuing Brahma Nishta and staying as householders in present 
society verses those who think sannyasa is still relevant for True and 
dedicated student even now , even in the present times and environment. In 
short I am a Vedantist for over 30 years with wonderfull stillness a 
degree of brahmagyana and degree of liberation but not 
staedfast...........I have used the word I many times and to you my fellow 
advaitins This is a crime for BRahman lovers . But as Ramesh Balsekar puts 
it so well knowing ego to be untrue and I to be untrue, still go on using 
it, for convinense of expression and as necessity for day to day 
communication. Finally a request "I AM LOOKING FOR A GURU WHO IS BRAHMA 
LEENA WITH STEADFASTNESS HE HAS TO BE A SANNYASI ,WHO IS WILLING TO GIVE 
SANNYASA DIKSHA, NOT INTERESTED IN GURUS WHO PROMOTE BRAHMAGYAN FOR 
HOUSEHOLDERS...DONE IT!! AND KNOW ITS LIMITATIONS!!"...........Well what 
else.............Aham Brahmasmi, Ayam ekam Brahman, Om satchitekam 
brahman, Tattwa masi,

