+++
title = "77 Ravishankar Venkatraman"
date = "2005-07-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014797.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-July/014797.html)

Sunil wrote:

>necessity for day to day communication. Finally a request "I AM LOOKING FOR 
>A GURU WHO IS BRAHMA LEENA WITH STEADFASTNESS HE HAS TO BE A SANNYASI ,WHO 
>IS WILLING TO GIVE SANNYASA DIKSHA, NOT INTERESTED IN GURUS WHO PROMOTE 
>BRAHMAGYAN FOR HOUSEHOLDERS...DONE IT!! AND KNOW ITS 
>LIMITATIONS!!"...........Well what else.............Aham Brahmasmi, Ayam 
>ekam Brahman, Om satchitekam brahman, Tattwa masi,

Sunilji - It is encouraging to know that there are still people like you 
with a burning desire for knowledge and to follow sanyasa dharma.  It looks 
like that you have met many mahatmas, however you have not really taken any 
one to be a serious guru.

When I talk about Guru tattwa to my kids, I tell them things I read which I 
think is worth sharing and make them understand the importance of Guru 
concept. These days I teach theem from Guru Gita. Guru Gita is a discussion 
between Lord Siva and His wife Parvati in Skanda Purana. In short, Guru is 
Siva and Siva is guru. One should have upmost devotion to guru to get 
liberation - moksha mulam guror krupa.

When we were kids and went to elementary school, we are not in a position to 
really judge the teacher. It is the teacher who decides whether we can go to 
the next grade based on what we have learnt. This continues till we get our 
education complete. Older people working on their doctoral degrees may have 
a different view of the teachers who are guiding them, as they themselves 
are very advanced learners. The point I am trying to make here is that, you 
need to follow someone at every stage, even to get a doctoral degree.

I am sure that a guru will come to you to give you what you deserve, however 
you may want to choose someone from the list of mahatmas you have seen and 
heed to His advice, which will put you to the next level and so on.

Good Luck and God bless,
Ravi



