+++
title = "31 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2013-03-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-March/034214.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2013-March/034214.html)

The father of Nivrittidev, Jnanadev, Sopanadev and Muktabai is a famous
case of one reverting to grihastasrama after taking sanyasa
from Swami Ramanand after lying to his guru. He and his children had to pay
very heavily for that.

-- 
regards,
Sarma.

On Thu, Feb 28, 2013 at 9:32 PM, Abhishek Madhyastha
<abhishek046 at gmail.com>wrote:

> Namaste,
>
> I was asked by a person on my page about an incident in his personal
> life about his grandfather taking sanyasa in anger. He wants to know
> whether it is possible to go back to grihastashrama given the
> circumstances that he lied to his Guru. Here's the question he's
> asked:-
>
> My nana (mother's father) use to wear pitambar as cloth, khadau in
> feet, jata on head for last 25 years but didnt take sanyas nd was
> living wid his family,
> but there would alwayz some misconception btween him and whole family
> many times he ran away frm home
> but dis tym due to some misunderstanding  he went to kumbh in anger nd
> there he lied dat he has not any family behind him and he is alone ,
> nd asked a guru to give him sanyas,
> when family members in search of him went to kumbh he was already a
> sanyasi ,
> when family members met with the guru den he told dat, as he(my nana)
> lied to him so he can revert to grihasth jeevan.
>
> Is it possible to go in the reverse order in the ashrama dharma just
> because he lied to get sanyasa. Is there any provision in the shastras
> under such circumstances?
>
> Regards,
>
> Abhishek Madhyastha
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

