+++
title = "88 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2014-03-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-March/036796.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-March/036796.html)

Hare Krishna Sri BP ji,

praNAms Sri Sujal prabhuji
Hare Krishna

Sorry for interruption. Just want to make one point.

>  You are always welcome to share your thoughts with me prabhuji.

Upadesha-s should be said and has to be understood from the perspective
which makes one introvert.

>  Yes, you are right prabhuji...our senses naturally programmed in such a 
way that it goes always outward but the direction should be changed 
towards inwards..adhyAtmika is what is meant by this. 

kuTastha (AtmA / Brahman) is reflected in pot water is called as 
chidAbhAsa
(jIva). jIva spreads through the body via 72000 nADI-s. jIva with the help
of mind and mind with the help of senses becomes extrovert. Mind travels
via sense objects upto objects (my own understanding) and intellect
interprets and gives meaningful meaning which is associated with our past
memories i.e. mind and brain or say perception is done by reflecting upon
and matching the current image with the past image that is seen. If
unrecognized, it is a new shape and needs a new name.

>  I agree prabhuji.

So, from Brahman to jiva to mind to sense is a journey outward. This is
refers to external objects (bahir draShya).
sanchita Jnana, that which is already known in past, means mental
reflections, present in mind. This refers to internal objects (antar
draShya).

>  I agree prabhuji.

Now our journey is to go back from extrovert to introvert. Both the
reflections i.e. external (outside our body - in material world) and in
inside us (in our mind) are to be renounced. In other words whatever is
draShya (observed) be it worldly objects or their reflection in mind, are
to be renounced and mind has to be turned introvert.

>  well said prabhuji I agree.  one of the reasons for getting the 
vairAgya is temporary nature of this jagat and dOsha darshana. 

So the map would be

external objects --> internal objects --> source of both (no objects).


Now, the question is, by your way of understanding, can we reach the 
source
of both (which is the substratum of every reflection?

>  Till we realize that there is nothing apart from brahman, we need to 
detach ourselves from the external world treating it as anitya / 
ashAshvata and concentrate on our sva-svarUpa through shAstropadesha 
sharvaNa, mananAdi sAdhana...Once we get that Atmaikatva jnAna, we would 
realize that whatever is there inside, outside, left, right, top, botton 
etc. is Atma only and nothing else.  It is because of this only shruti 
says sarvaM khalvidam brahma. 


By seeing clay an clay will mind calm down and merge in source or will it
remain to keep seeing 'something'?

>  Seeing the clay (kAraNa) in vikAra (nAma rUpa kArya) is what is called 
Atmaikatva darshana or samyaK drushti prabhuji.  yattu sarvAtmabhAvAt 
arvAk vAlAgramAtramapi anyatvena drushyate na ahaM asmeeti tadavasthA 
avidyA...clarifies shankara in bruhad bhAshya.  So, it is not seeing the 
particular (vishesha) it is all seeing the sAmAnya (universal) behind the 
vishesha. 


Please think.

Unlike me you all are highly intelligent and can quote shastras at will :)

>  Kindly dont think like that...here we are all mere students of 
vedAnta..learning from each other's view points.  Disagreements will 
always be there in the discussions like this..that would be the part & 
parcel of this jignAsa. 


. Clarity and right direction is extremely important.

>  Yes, I agree prabhuji.

A personal opinion:

An introvert mind is not interested and hence not influenced by external
objects. Hence nothing more gets into the mind with a tinge of desire
(kAma). What remains is old reflected, the collected information, which 
are
shapes and forms with meaning attached to them, AND our desires that are
already present since past lives before our mind became introvert.
Meditation is a process to dis-associate with objects (both external and
internal) and let Brahman uproot desires. When whatever was dumped into
mind is fully emptied, mind is destroyed and merges in brahman. Less the
desire, more is the peace. Just like tiger after tasting blood ... :)
similarly mind after tasting the nijAnanda (even a short period of time)
wishes to experience it again and again. With more deep jumps into source,
this desire intensifies until the ego sense and desires and thoughts are
completely destroyed. This is end of sadhana after which whatever has to 
be
achieved has been achieved, nothing needs to be fulfilled anymore, no need
for shastras, guru, meditation, god, this body. AND you do not return back
to this world. This state is permanent.

>  Thanks for sharing your personal opinion and agree with it prabhuji.

(read my signature ;) )

>  And...I read your signature :-))

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
