+++
title = "64 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-06-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024771.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024771.html)

Hari Om Sadanandaji, Pranaams!

yaH Atmani eva ramate na viShayeShu, yah AtmanA eva triptaH na annarasAdinA, 
yah bAhyArthalAbha anapekShya Atmani eva saMtuShThaH yaH IdrshaH sanyAsI saH 
eva  Atmavit - sarvataH vItatriShnaH iti arthaH(BG 3.18)

tasmAt tvam(he mumukSho) nistraigunyaH nirdvandaH niryogakShemaH AtmavAn 
bhava.(BG 2.45)

 vimuktaH trIn guNAn atItya amrtatvam ashnute.(BG 14.20)

 vishuddha sattvasya guNAH prashAntaH svAtmAnubhUtiH paramA prashAntiH.
triptiH praharShaH paramAtmaniShThA yayA sadAnandarasaM samrcchhati. 
(vivekacUDAmani 119)

The phala of the karma is enjoyed in the changed circumstances when the 
actual enjoyment takes place and apUrva ensures this. If changes in external 
situation(modern gadgets, comforts, etc.) stand by me during enjoyment, why 
not changed internal mental state(shuddha sattva guna) stand by me and 
ensure i do not get the effects of three gunas.

 In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya
--------------------------------------------------
From: "Kuntimaddi Sadananda" <ksadananda108 at gmail.com>
Sent: Tuesday, June 22, 2010 7:18 PM

> Bhaskarji - PraNAms
>
> In my understanding, jnaani is the one who clearly understood that he
> is guNa-atiitaH and guNas belong to prakRiti only - ...
>
> Anger, etc arises at the BMI level - along with ahankara, which itself
> is a combination of aatma and anaatma. Jnaani has viveka or
> discriminative intellect to shift his attention to the aatma part as
> saakshii, while recognizing that anaatma part which is of lower
> prakRiti has the anger, kaama etc - due to past habits or due to
> praarabda karma. Hence, due to past habits, the emotions do arise at
> the BMI level and jnaani sees them or witnesses them.
>
>
> Hari Om!
> Sadananda
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 

