+++
title = "68 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-06-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024777.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024777.html)



--------------------------------------------------
From: "Kuntimaddi Sadananda" <ksadananda108 at gmail.com>
Sent: Wednesday, June 23, 2010 9:08 PM
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" 
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Two types of Atma jnAni-s & their 
approachtoreallife situation

> Pranipataji - PraNAms
>
>
> If one understands where the problem lies in terms of the demarcations
> in abidance of jnaanam vs demarcation in jnaanam itself, then the
> discussion served its purpose.
>
>
> Hari Om!
> Sadananda
>

Hari Om Shri Sadanandaji, Pranaams!

Here is how this thread started.
-----------------------------------------------------------

// quote //

There can be a Jnani who is in the first category and another Jnani in the
second category.  For the first Jnani, anger arises and thereafter he
quells
it.  For the second Jnani there is no need to even quell anger as it does
not even arise in the first place.  The first one is a little disturbed;
the
second is least disturbed.  This is one typical case where one can see the
real-life basis for the distinction between/across Jnanis.  And remember
both these states are WITHIN the daivee sampat.

The same can be said with desire, kAma, too.  There can be two mental
states, two minds, one where kAma arises and is quelled and another where
kAma does not even arise (when the stimulus is present).

------------------------------------------

By quoting BG verse pashyan shrnvan.... if we are to accept the presence of 
kAma, krodha, ........ in a jnAni, please classify who is an anjAni. If 
kAma, krodha .... are all daivI sampat then what is AsurI?

In my humble opinion the one in whom kAma, krodha ... are present and who is 
not worried about correcting it, he is not even fit for starting spiritual 
journey by undertaking karma yoga.

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya 


