+++
title = "78 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-06-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024804.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024804.html)

--------------------------------------------------
From: "Shyam" <shyam_md at yahoo.com>

> Pranams.

> In Ishwara srshti from the Cosmic standpoint, from the standpoint of the 
> Order, there is nothing positive or negative. Anger is very much part of 
> the Order. There is no separate entity that is parallel to, or opposed to, 
> the Order.
>
> Consider anger now. Someone violates dharma - and if the jnani is witness 
> to this - say an innocent calf getting killed. There is anger. It is 
> non-volitional, it is not reasoned nor calculated. It just is. Ishwara 
> srshti. It is no one's power to alter what is an integral component of the 
> Order.

Hari OM
> Shri Gurubhyoh namah
> Shyam
>
-----------------------------------
Msg no: 35233 in Advaitin List.

Most of the time we are unable to be forgive because we feel our hurt,
our resentment, our anger, our hatred is justified. Justified by what?
by the other person's actions.

The trouble is this - the action "was" the "other's" and the negative
feelings "is" "mine" - its my mind which is tied up in the threads of
hurt, my heart which still smolder with the embers of a fire that
should have been put out a long time ago.
......
Forgiveness is about understanding. Whatever any one does is because
that particular individual at that point in time in those peculiar set
of circumstances could have done that and that only. This is because
whether we like it or not, there is a perfect Order that is set in
place here, and everything that happens is ever in accordance with
that Order alone. The other person's actions are no doubt heinous. But
perhaps if i had the upbringing that he or she did, the temperament,
the value structure, the social environment etc etc then my own
actions may have been exactly the same.
----------------------------------------


Hari Om Shri Shyamji, Pranaams!

gahanA karmaNo gatiH. (The essential nature of action, prohibited action and 
inaction is hard to understand).

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya 


