+++
title = "60 Anand Hudli"
date = "2011-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/026972.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/026972.html)

>Nothing is there in BKS about 'chitrAhuti' prabhuji?? In Rig veda prayOga
deepika, (by Ved.Br. Shree dhAli Lakshmi Narasima shAstri, he is a National
award winner & salakshana Rigveda ghanapAti) under the section bhOjana
vidhi, he says chitrAhuti should be >given to chitra, chitragupta, >yama &
sarva bhuta before bhOjana, and geeta shloka 'pachAmyannam chaturvidham'
should be chanted ...and he talks about the another

The Brahmakarmasamuccaya talks about a slightly different chitrahuti where
three balis are given - 1) bhUpataye namaH  2) bhuvanapataye namaH, and 3)
bhUtAnAM pataye namaH. Also, the middle and ring fingers of the left hand
must be touching the leaf (or plate) on which food is served while doing the
Aposhana (amR^itopastaraNamasi svAhA). tarjanImadhyamAMguShThaiH, with the
index, middle fingers and the thumb (of the right hand) one must take in the
prANAhuti, " AUM prANAya svAhA prANAyedaM na mama".
madhyamAnAmikAMguShThaiH, with the middle and ring fingers and the thumb,
one must take in the prANAhuti, "AUM apAnAya svAhA apAnAyedaM na mama".
kaniShThikAnAmikAMguShThaiH, with the ring and little fingers and the thumb,
one must take in the prANAhuti, "AUM vyAnAya svAhA vyAnAyedaM na mama".
madhyamAnAmikAMguShThaiH, with the middle and ring fingers and the thumb,
one must take in the prANAhuti, "AUM udAnAya svAhA udAnAyedaM na mama".
sarvAbhiH, with all five fingers one must take in the prANAhutis, "AUM
samAnAya svAhA samAnAyedaM na mama" and "AUM brahmaNe svAhA brahmaNa idaM na
mama".

Anand

