+++
title = "126 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2016-09-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042401.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-September/042401.html)

I have a strong suspicion that vinayakas are different from vighneswara.
regards,
Sarma.


On Mon, Sep 5, 2016 at 3:46 PM, Venkatraghavan S via Advaita-l
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
> An alternative explanation to the below that I have heard to the BG 9.25
> bhAshya is that Shankara is saying that if we worship an adhishthAna devatA
> in any form, then we will get only a limited result. If you worship the
> pUrNa Ishvara that is manifesting in that particular form for our benefit,
> we will get unlimited results. It depends on the perspective of the
> worshipper.
>
> In the same deity a limited deva can be invoked, or also the pUrNa Ishvara.
> Ishvara is ready to take whatever form we like, however if we think that
> what we worship only the form with limited powers, then we are limiting his
> glory and consequently we only get limited results.
>
> So the reference to Vinayaka and sapta mAtara: is said from the perspective
> of the devotee, not the Ishvara that appears in the form of Ganesha or
> Devi. Shankaracharya is not saying Vinayaka or sapta mAtara: are limited,
> but that if they are seen as limited than that will limit the results
> achieved.
>
> That is why the GaNapati atharvashIrsha says tvameva sarvam khalvidam
> brahmAsi, to inspire the devotee to see the paripUrNa Ishvara as GaNapati.
>
> A similar point was made by HH Chandrashekhara Bharati Mahasvaminah in the
> dialogues with a devotee (which I posted to this list a few days ago),
> specifically in answer to the question "Who is worshipped during
> sandhyAvandanam?
>
> Regards
> Venkatraghavan
>
> On 5 Sep 2016 7:54 a.m., "V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l" <
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>
>> On Mon, Sep 5, 2016 at 10:35 AM, Anand Hudli via Advaita-l <
>> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:
>>
>> > >There is a separate category of 'vināyaka-s' who are evil spirits
> featured
>> > >in the Srimadbhāgavatam several times and in some other puraṇas. This
>> > >should not be confused with the Ganapati. Shankara, the vaidika, in his
>> > >Gita bhashya is referring to the above group of vinayakas only.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
