+++
title = "265 s.ramachandran at hdfcbank.com"
date = "2011-12-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-December/030180.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-December/030180.html)



I am out of the office until 01/07/2012.

As I am on leave till Jan 7 request u to mark your mails to Jayant Lele /
Raghavan Neelkantan. Thanks/Rgds


Note: This is an automated response to your message  "Advaita-l Digest, Vol
89, Issue 24" sent on 12/27/2011 11:30:01 PM.

This is the only notification you will receive while this person is away.


HDFC Bank has been recognized as "The Strongest Bank in Asia Pacific Region" by The Asian Banker, outperforming 59 top tier banks across 13 countries.
____________________________________________

Disclaimer:   
"The information contained herein (including any accompanying documents) is confidential and is intended solely for the addressee(s). If you have erroneously received this message, please immediately delete it and notify the sender. Also, if you are not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any disclosure, copying, distribution or taking any action in reliance on the contents of this message or any accompanying document is strictly prohibited and is unlawful. The organization is not responsible for any damage caused by a virus or alteration of the e-mail by a third party or otherwise. The contents of this message may not necessarily represent the views or policies of HDFC Bank Ltd."

