+++
title = "115 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-03-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014350.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014350.html)

Namaste.

Note: You may want to read the  Introduction in 
http://www.escribe.com/culture/advaitin/m25159.html , if
you have not already seen it.

sharaNyamiti yadvastu ekAkAramakhaNDitaM .
khAdapyatitarAM sUkShmaM sarva-tyAgena labhyate .. 50 ..

adRRishyamashrUyamANaM jyotiragrAhya-rUpakaM .
tapomayena manasA gRRihyamANaM hi tatsvayaM .. 51 ..

jyotiirasAmRRitam brahma sarvAbhibhava-hetukaM .
svAtiriktaM cha mithyeti brahma-pUrNatvataH svayaM .. 52 ..


sarvaloka-sharaNyamiti ekameva tattvaM svayaM jyotiH
sarva-bhAna-kAraNaM . indriyAbhiragrAhyaM tat .
amRRita-rasAnubhavenaiva vedyaM svAtiriktAsahaM . tena
tyaktena bhu~njIthA iti Isha-shrutiH ..


Synopsis:  The one refuge of all the universe is the single
foundational principle of The Self. That is what lightens
up everything.   It is subtler than Space. Anything other
than the Self is a mithyA.  It cannot be grasped by the
senses. A  mind full of tapas is necessary.  Only by
surrendering everything that is non-Self, can that nectar
be ‘tasted’. Ishopanishad may be recalled.
________________________________________________________


amanastAM yadA yAti brahma-vRRikShaH prakAshate .
sanAtano.ayamachalaH eko vyApaka uchyate .. 53 ..


pashyatyadvayamekaM cha brahma-vishvamidaM jagat .
ayaM lokastadantashcha tenaiva kabalIkRRitaH .. 54 ..


tenaiva puruSheNeti pUrNa-ekatva-siddhaye .
buddhau dRRiShTashchAnya-vRRikShaH
loka-vRRikShAdvilakShaNaH .. 55 ..


Urdhva-mUlo hyayaH shAkhaH sarobimbita-vRRikShavat .
asatya eSha AbhAsaH na tvayaM pAramArthikaH .. 56 ..


saMsAra-vRRikShashchedyo.ayaM nAtmA hanti na hanyate .
evaM cha dRRiDhabhAvena nAhaM dehendriyAdayaH .. 57 ..


acchhedyo brahma-vRRikSho hi atadvRRikShAshrayaH sadA .
oMkArashshAshvato vRRikShaH yanmAtrA sujagatsthitiH .. 58
..


atad-vRRikSho mano-vRRikShaH manashchhedyo mahAniti .
manasaH pariNAmaishcha manaH shaktiH khiliikRRitA .. 59 ..


dhyAyato viShayAn pumsaH saMgadoShA anekashaH .
manaso nigrahaH kAryaH shrutiyuktyanubhUtidaH .. 60 ..


brahma-vanaM brahma sa vRRikSha AsIt iti divi tiShTatyekaH
. iti sva-mahimAnameva anubhavati brAhmaNaH . manasaH
aj~nAna-kAryatvAt avastveva tat . na sAhyenApi hRRidaye
sadrUpaM vidyate manaH iti mahopaniShacchhrutyA
marIchyudakavatbhrAnti-kRRitasya manasaH nigrahaH bhramaH
yataH bhrAntyapohe manaH nigrahaM vinaiva  nashyati .
sva-kalpita-manaH svAkhaNDatva-vij~nAne svasminneva layaM
prApnoti ..

Synopsis: The One Eternal unmoving that pervades everything
 shines as a colossus  (brahma-vRRikShah) when the mind
itself ceases to be the mind. The non-dual oneness of
brahman  is then seen to have ‘swallowed’ this universe.
This colossal ‘tree’ is seen by the same puruSha in the
buddhi, as distinct from the  universe. It has its roots
upward, like the reflection of the tree in the bank seen in
the river.  This reflection is not real. The samsAra-tree
has to be cut asunder. The Atman however can neither be cut
nor destroyed. The ‘bhAva’ that does this is the conviction
 ‘I am not this body or the senses’. The colossus of the
brahma-tree is the tree of ‘Aum’ by which the whole is
sustained. The tree of the non-Self is just the tree of the
mind. It is the mind that has to be cut asunder. By
thinking of sense-objects this will never happen. It is the
mind that has to be controlled by reason and  by shruti.
Recall the vedic passage: ‘Brahman is the forest; Brahman
is the Tree. The colossal stands unique’.   It tantamounts
to saying that The Self alone is there and nothing else. As
the mahopanishad says, it is the mind that creates the
delusion of water-in-mirage. The creation of the mind by
its own ignorance has to be negated. The mind itself is a
projected entity from the Self. By the universality and
indivisibility of the Self, the created mind along with its
own creations have all to be sublated.
___________________________________________________________
Yoga-raMdhita-karmANaH hRRidiyoga-vibhAvite .
yogino yaM prapashyanti yogesho harireva hi .. 61 ..

ekasyaivAnusaMdhAne sAdhakAH kArikoktayaH .
ityuddhRRitaishcha yaiH shlokaiH prakaTIkriyate manaH .. 62
..

shrIgauDapAdakAchAryaiH  kArikAH kRRitA iti tAnyeva vAkyAni
udAhriyante mananArthaM ..

Synopsis:   In this context of the yoga of the heart
(‘hRRidi-yoga) the shlokas of the KarikAs of
Gaudapadacharya are recalled below
_____________________________________________________________
(To be continued)

PraNAms to all the advaitins on this list and to my father.
profvk


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

You are welcome to have a look at any of the following  books on my website:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk

1. Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision & Practice
2. Live Happily, the Gita Way
3. Advaita Dialogue for beginners.
4. Discourses of the Paramacharya on Soundaryalahari.

