+++
title = "91 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-03-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014305.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014305.html)

Namaste

Ravi Mayavaram writes (in a personal note):
*Will you please post a detailed translation of the
paragraph in prose after shloka No.8?  A detailed
explanation  how the quotes given therein  exactly fit in
the context, will be helpful. And the definition of samadhi
given therein  is beautiful --
"tatpada-tvaM-padayo-raikya-meva buddhau samyag-AdhIyate
iti samAdhi-ruchyate" *
---------------------
 Thank you Ravi for prompting me to go back to the text.
Yes, I did neglect  to elaborate on that prose commentary
following the first 8 shlokas. But  the neglect was more
because the passage was difficult. But after your prompting
I read through it carefully. The definition  of Samadhi
given therein should at least have been translated . So
here is my attempt at  an overall translation of the whole
paragraph. Even then it is only one step better than a
synopsis. It is not a complete translation. And after the
translation below you have my remarks expressing my
bafflement at the contents of the paragraph and its
significance. ‘Translation’ begins:
  _______________________________
Right in  the beginning of the fourth Kanda of Taittiriya
Samhita (of the Yajur Veda) the Veda text begins with the
words *yunjAnaH prathamaM tatvAya*. The purpose is to offer
a prayer in praise of samAdhi (samAdhi-prArthanA).  SamAdhi
itself is nothing but the perfect fixation of the intellect
in the oneness of  the word ‘tat’ ( ‘That’) and the word
‘tvaM’ (‘You’) . SamAdhi comes from ‘samyak AdhIyate’
(perfectly fixes).  The fourth kANDa of Yajur veda has
seven chapters. The respective beginnings of the chapters
are: 
*yunjAnaH prathamAM tatvAya* :  First uniting the mind with
the tatva that is the absolute Effulgence.
*viShNoH kramo’si* :  You are the step of Vishnu.
*apAM tv emaM sAdhayAmi* : I place thee in the waters 
*rashmirasi kShayAya* : Thou art the ray, for kShaya (=?) 
*namaste rudra* : Prostrations to Rudra
*ashmannUrjaM * : The strength resting on the stone
*agnA viShNU* :  Oh Agni and Vishnu

It is significant that both the fourth and fifth Kandas are
the only ones wihich have seven chapters. The reason for
this should be researched.  The glory of the Person within
is the establishment in the Infinite – that is the secret.
_____________________________________________

Translation ends. 

Note by VK: Thus goes the paragraph. Except for the
definition of the word samAdhi, all other things mentioned
above are perplexing.  My father used to go through the
Vedas repeatedly. In his lectures he used to quote from the
Vedas and bring out their advaitic meaning. The book that
he used is still with me. It is full of marginal notes by
him. All in Sanskrit language in the grantha script. At the
beginning of the fourth kAnDa (which has been referred to
above) the margin has the words *samAdhi prArthanA* written
by him. This shows his mind has been working along these
lines long before he wrote this mss. Why he has quoted the
beginnings of the seven chapters of the fourth KANDa , 
beats me. And the reference to the number seven of the
total number of  chapters in the 4th and 5th kANDa, and the
claim for  its  great significance  is also more
perplexing. I am glad I was able to connect these seven
quotations  with the beginnings of the seven chapters. But
the other quotations perhaps come from Rig Veda.  I am only
guessing.  

Well, here is enough food for scholarly research!  Anyway
my thanks to Ravi for prompting me to go back to the mss.
and write this much. 

PraNAms to all the advaitins on this list and to my father.
profvk   


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

You are welcome to have a look at any of the following  books on my website:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk

1. Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision & Practice
2. Live Happily, the Gita Way
3. Advaita Dialogue for beginners.
4. Discourses of the Paramacharya on Soundaryalahari.

