+++
title = "37 K. Sadananda"
date = "2001-07-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-July/001731.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-July/001731.html)

>Date: Thu, 26 Jul 2001 06:58:29 -0400 (EDT)
>From: Mail Delivery Subsystem <MAILER-DAEMON>
>To: <sada at anvil.nrl.navy.mil>
>Subject: Returned mail: User unknown
>Auto-Submitted: auto-generated (failure)
>
>
>
>The original message was received at Thu, 26 Jul 2001 06:58:03 -0400 (EDT)
>from sadananda.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.127.183]
>
>    ----- The following addresses had permanent fatal errors -----
><ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
>
>    ----- Transcript of session follows -----
>... while talking to mail.braincells.com.:
>>>>  RCPT To:<ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
><<< 550 <ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>: User unknown
>550 <ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>... User unknown
>
>Reporting-MTA: dns; anvil.nrl.navy.mil
>Received-From-MTA: DNS; sadananda.nrl.navy.mil
>Arrival-Date: Thu, 26 Jul 2001 06:58:03 -0400 (EDT)
>
>Final-Recipient: RFC822; ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG
>Action: failed
>Status: 5.1.1
>Remote-MTA: DNS; mail.braincells.com
>Diagnostic-Code: SMTP; 550 <ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>: User unknown
>Last-Attempt-Date: Thu, 26 Jul 2001 06:58:25 -0400 (EDT)
>
>Return-Path: <sada at anvil.nrl.navy.mil>
>Received: from [132.250.127.183] (sadananda.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.127.183])
>       by anvil.nrl.navy.mil (8.9.3/8.9.3) with ESMTP id GAA16869;
>       Thu, 26 Jul 2001 06:58:03 -0400 (EDT)
>Mime-Version: 1.0
>Message-Id: <p05001902b785a45ce454@[132.250.127.183]>
>In-Reply-To: <Pine.SUN.3.96.1010725100841.24148A-100000 at nyx10>
>References: <Pine.SUN.3.96.1010725100841.24148A-100000 at nyx10>
>Date: Thu, 26 Jul 2001 07:01:58 -0400
>To: advaitin at yahoogroups.com, ADVAITA-L at ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG
>From: "K. Sadananda" <sada at anvil.nrl.navy.mil>
>Subject: Re: Words Maya and nirguNa
>Cc: shrao at NYX.NET
>Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii" ; format="flowed"
>
>>On Mon, 23 Jul 2001, Vidyasankar wrote:
>>
>>(quote from Sadananda)
>>
>>>  >Yesteday Shreeman S.M.S. Chari mentioned in his lectures that the
>>>  >word Maya and nirguNa each one occurs only ones in the upanishat -
>>
>>He's wrong, at least if his own tradition be believed.  There is also the
>>verse:
>
>Shrisha Rao
>
>Thanks for your input.  I think I had clarified in my next post,
>perhaps in advaitin list, Shreeman Chari's statement pertains to the
>use of the word Maya in the context of how Bhagavan Shankara used in
>the advaita doctrine.  In the other places where maya occurs he
>contends that its usage is not in the same sense. In the advaita,
>maaya equated essentially as prakr^iti, with triguNaatmika and with
>aavarana and vikshepa shakti and it becomes upaadhi of Iswara for
>the creation.   In that sense it is usage occurs only once that is
>in the Swetaaswatara Up. and even there also contextually if one
>examines, it is not exactly the same, says Shreeman Chari.
>
>He also mentions, of course, given the adviatic position that
>Brahman alone is real as sat, one has to bring in Maaya to account
>for the appearance of jada prakR^iti/ jagat. In that case it becomes
>shrutit based anupalabdhi pramaaNa, rather than direct shruti
>pramaaNa. Nothing wrong in the use of anupalabdi and  all achaaryas
>have used in some context or the other to justify their doctrine.
>
>I give a benefit of doubt to Shreeman Chari's statement before I
>accept or reject it.
>
>Hari Om!
>Sadananda
>
>
>
>
>
>--
>K. Sadananda
>Code 6323
>Naval Research Laboratory
>Washington D.C. 20375
>Voice (202)767-2117
>Fax:(202)767-2623

--
K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623

