+++
title = "34 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-03-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044691.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044691.html)

regards,
Sarma.

---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Kalyan <kalyan_kg at yahoo.com>
Date: Mon, Mar 6, 2017 at 3:00 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Quantum Physics came from Vedas: Schrödinger and
Einstein read Veda's
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>, kuntimaddi sadananda <
kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com>
Cc: "D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ" <dvnsarma at gmail.com>


Dear Sri Sarmaji

I am a recent member on advaita-L but for some reason my messages are not
being delivered to the list. I have written a message on this topic and if
you like this, please feel free to post it on the list.

Thanks
Kalyan

Namaste

Not being a traditional follower of advaita, I wanted to remain silent on
the list. However I cannot remain silent when I hear such ludicrous claims
that quantum mechanics and modern physics are already present in the Vedas.
I would like to give a friendly advice that people who make such claims are
not only far removed from reality, but also run the risk of being subjected
to severe ridicule.

Regards
Kalyan


On Monday, March 6, 2017 3:27 AM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ via Advaita-l <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:


regards,
Sarma.

On Sun, Mar 5, 2017 at 8:31 PM, kuntimaddi sadananda <
kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com> wrote:

> Sarmaji - PraNAms
>
> Coming from Science background and still involved in the publishing
> racket, I completely concur with you regarding the validity of these
claims
> or their applications. It is possible that our ancestors  had some
> knowledge of uncertainties in quantifiable entities  but extension of that
> beyond to claim that Vedas had the quantum theory and that Schrodinger and
> Einstein deduced their theories from Vedas is to say in simple terms wrong
> ( I am refraining myself from using American slang). Schrodinger's cat
> problem is a famous one. Schrodinger appreciated Geeta and not sure he
> studied even Vedanta. I do not think Einstein studied Vedas, but he was
> familiar that they exist. Uncertainty principle is not the same as
> anirvachaniiyam of advaita vedanta. As you are familiar uncertainty is
only
> in terms of simultaneous measurements.
>
> Vedanta is a pramaana for not for objective knowledge but for the absolute
> knowledge. Shakara gives brilliant introduction in the Maitreye brahmana
> that all other sciences in essence are of the false knowledge only  and
> therefore belong to ignorance - what is true knowledge is defined, as in
> the commentary of  aatmaivopaaseeta aham asmeeti puurushaH
>
>
> Brahma satyam jagan mithyaa jeevao brahma eva naaparaH | and most
> importantly the second line
>
> anena vedyam tat shaastram - iti vedanta DinDimaH - that by which the
> above three are known -that alone is science. says Vedanta.
>
> Most important aspect for both scientists as well as non-scientists is the
> need to recognize that knowledge of any object, depends of the  presence
of
> the conscious entity, the subject while the converse is not true.
Existence
> of an object is established by the knowledge of its existence. Converse
> is true only to the extent that chidaabhaasa (hence the reflecting medium
-
> i.e the mind) is required for RECOGNITION of the consciousness or Sakshi
> that is all pervading. Objective sciences have no tools or their tools are
> incapable of analyzing even the mind or thought, leave alone
consciousness.
> Hence we find theories about the mind both by psychologists and
> philosophers each  differing from the others. Only Vedanta says mind is
> also matter but subtle and therefore cannot be measured by objective
tools.
> The objective scientists can at the most quantify up to neurons or some
> charge particles or waves.
>
> I use many science example to illustrate and to communicate Vedanta, which
> traditional aacharyaas have used examples that they are familiar. We
should
> use these to illustrate the fact the absolute truth cannot be objectified.
>
> I use extensively the light example in my talks. One cannot see the light
> directly unless it is reflected by an object. Similarly the consciousness,
> the light of all lights cannot be known directly but only via reflection
of
> it by the mind.
>
> In essence no objective sciences can ever by useful other than in the
> transactional world for understanding the absolute truth. For that Vedanta
> alone is pramaana. The other claims that the modern Science came from
> Vedanta is unwanted nor is useful. It is better to state the fact that
> objective sciences are limited to objectifiable entities and have no entry
> in terms of the analysis of the subject, I.
>
> Hari Om!
> Sadananda
>
> If are kind enough can you forward this to the list since for some reason
> my mails via yahoo is not going through. Thanks
>
>
>
> ------------------------------
> *From:* D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
> vedanta.org>
>
> *Subject:* Re: [Advaita-l] Quantum Physics came from Vedas: Schrödinger
> and Einstein read Veda's
>
> I want to humbly inform the list members that I have taught PG students of
> Physics in a University for 13 years and I taught
> Quantum Mechanics also. So your quotations do not in any way affect my
> simple question.
>
> Why these people with all their anushThana and swadhyaya of vedas who
claim
> Vedic origin of modern science
> themselves could not do what westerners did?
>
> regards,
> Sarma.
>
>
>
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
