+++
title = "36 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-03-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044689.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-March/044689.html)

regards,
Sarma.

---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: kuntimaddi sadananda <kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com>
Date: Sun, Mar 5, 2017 at 8:31 PM
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Quantum Physics came from Vedas: Schrödinger and
Einstein read Veda's
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <
advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>, sreenivasa murthy <
narayana145 at yahoo.co.in>, "V. Subrahmanian" <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
Cc: "D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ" <dvnsarma at gmail.com>


Sarmaji - PraNAms

Coming from Science background and still involved in the publishing racket,
I completely concur with you regarding the validity of these claims or
their applications. It is possible that our ancestors  had some knowledge
of uncertainties in quantifiable entities  but extension of that beyond to
claim that Vedas had the quantum theory and that Schrodinger and Einstein
deduced their theories from Vedas is to say in simple terms wrong ( I am
refraining myself from using American slang). Schrodinger's cat problem is
a famous one. Schrodinger appreciated Geeta and not sure he studied even
Vedanta. I do not think Einstein studied Vedas, but he was familiar that
they exist. Uncertainty principle is not the same as anirvachaniiyam of
advaita vedanta. As you are familiar uncertainty is only in terms of
simultaneous measurements.

Vedanta is a pramaana for not for objective knowledge but for the absolute
knowledge. Shakara gives brilliant introduction in the Maitreye brahmana
that all other sciences in essence are of the false knowledge only  and
therefore belong to ignorance - what is true knowledge is defined, as in
the commentary of  aatmaivopaaseeta aham asmeeti puurushaH


Brahma satyam jagan mithyaa jeevao brahma eva naaparaH | and most
importantly the second line

anena vedyam tat shaastram - iti vedanta DinDimaH - that by which the above
three are known -that alone is science. says Vedanta.

Most important aspect for both scientists as well as non-scientists is the
need to recognize that knowledge of any object, depends of the  presence of
the conscious entity, the subject while the converse is not true. Existence
of an object is established by the knowledge of its existence. Converse is
true only to the extent that chidaabhaasa (hence the reflecting medium -
i.e the mind) is required for RECOGNITION of the consciousness or Sakshi
that is all pervading. Objective sciences have no tools or their tools are
incapable of analyzing even the mind or thought, leave alone consciousness.
Hence we find theories about the mind both by psychologists and
philosophers each  differing from the others. Only Vedanta says mind is
also matter but subtle and therefore cannot be measured by objective tools.
The objective scientists can at the most quantify up to neurons or some
charge particles or waves.

I use many science example to illustrate and to communicate Vedanta, which
traditional aacharyaas have used examples that they are familiar. We should
use these to illustrate the fact the absolute truth cannot be objectified.

I use extensively the light example in my talks. One cannot see the light
directly unless it is reflected by an object. Similarly the consciousness,
the light of all lights cannot be known directly but only via reflection of
it by the mind.

In essence no objective sciences can ever by useful other than in the
transactional world for understanding the absolute truth. For that Vedanta
alone is pramaana. The other claims that the modern Science came from
Vedanta is unwanted nor is useful. It is better to state the fact that
objective sciences are limited to objectifiable entities and have no entry
in terms of the analysis of the subject, I.

Hari Om!
Sadananda

If are kind enough can you forward this to the list since for some reason
my mails via yahoo is not going through. Thanks



------------------------------
*From:* D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-
vedanta.org>

*Subject:* Re: [Advaita-l] Quantum Physics came from Vedas: Schrödinger and
Einstein read Veda's

I want to humbly inform the list members that I have taught PG students of
Physics in a University for 13 years and I taught
Quantum Mechanics also. So your quotations do not in any way affect my
simple question.

Why these people with all their anushThana and swadhyaya of vedas who claim
Vedic origin of modern science
themselves could not do what westerners did?

regards,
Sarma.
