+++
title = "65 D.V.N.Sarma"
date = "2002-03-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-March/002486.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-March/002486.html)

On 14 Mar 2002, at 17:39,  Shrinivas Gadkari wrote:

> Namaste All,
>
> Here my understanding:
>
> Consider the three purushas of Chapter 15 Gita.
>
> kshara, akshara and uttama.
>
> kshara purusha is the Jiva.
>
> Thanks to the excellent postings of Shri Dave, it is
> quite certain now that akshara purusha, the kutastha
> is the sakshi. This is be attained through Jnana.
>
As I have already pointed out according to Sankara
kUTastha is mAyA.

Defining  sAkshi as akshara distinct from brahman
will be admitting two permanent distinct entities
which I think goes against the advaitic doctrine.

regards,

Sarma.
> However, uttama purusha (the state of brahman) manifests
> only by grace and that state is sustained jointly by bhakti
> and jnana (may be this is termed para bhakti).
>
> Waking, dream and sleep states belong to the kshara purusha.
>
> The fourth state is awareness of sakshi.
>
> I wonder, when people refer to the state beyond the fourth,
> are they refering to the state of the uttama purusha/ state
> of para bhakti.
>
> best regards
> Shrinivas Gadkari
>
> ------------------------------
>
> Date:    Thu, 14 Mar 2002 20:55:24 -0500
> From:    Ravishankar Venkatraman <sunlike at HOTMAIL.COM>
> Subject: Re: Scale of Jnani's
>
> <html><div style='background-color:'><P>HB Dave wrote:</P>
> <P>>The more duality is negated, the clearer the Realization of Brahman </P>
> <P>>becomes, </P>
> <DIV></DIV>>and as realization becomes perfected names and forms come to be
> <DIV></DIV>>disregarded of themselves.
> <DIV></DIV>>
> <DIV></DIV>>
> <DIV></DIV>>When through the continuous practice of meditation, a man is established
> <DIV></DIV>>
> <DIV></DIV>>in the knowledge of Brahman, he becomes liberated even while living.
> <DIV></DIV>>Then
> <DIV></DIV>>the fate of his body does not matter.
> <DIV></DIV>>
> <DIV></DIV>>
> <DIV></DIV>
> <DIV></DIV>
> <DIV>I am not an expert in this, but I have read a good deal on the lives of Jivanmuktas. South i
ndia had quite a few of them in the last century. For the sake of giving a context to the discussio
n, I can talk of Sri Ramana Maharishi. At an early period in life, he left home andentered in
to samadhi (Nirvikalpa Samadhi) in Arunachala Ksetra. He did not know anything about the external w
orld. He started talking after this (even making articles and books), but still was a realized soul
. He was in a state of Sahaja Samadhi (in constant communion) with God or the Self. But it was a re
gular routine for the sageto teach in silence everyday for a few hours.</DIV>
> <DIV></DIV>
> <DIV>I think that when someone is in the state of Sahaja Samadhi, he/she lives like a normal pers
on. He/she may choose different methods to impart knowledge to disciples or continue to be silent.<
/DIV>
> <DIV></DIV>
> <DIV>My 2c worth.</DIV>
> <DIV>Ravi</DIV>
> <DIV></DIV></div><br clear=all><hr>Send and receive Hotmail on your mobile device: <a href=
'http://g.msn.com/1HM305401/14'>Click Here</a><br></html>
>
> ------------------------------
>
> End of ADVAITA-L Digest - 14 Mar 2002 to 15 Mar 2002 (#2002-64)
> ***************************************************************
>

