+++
title = "39 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2009-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022105.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2009-August/022105.html)

Dear Bhadraiah:

Yes, these folks gave their biased interpretations to achieve their goals. However, our immediate ancestors did accept them at face value without questioning. Our scholars needs to take the ownershipfor this.

Even now, many(cut & paste Internet) scholarsrely on Griffith's & Wilson's translation which is available on Internet without even making an effort to understand the original text. I have come across more Western folks who are genuinely trying to understand and interpret. It is our duty to become guardian of our culture if we desire to be Master of our future, with full realization that Western Churchianity will exploit every situation whenever and where possible.

The moron sadhu's that I have come across in US over past 35 years are the worst of the lot as they want to make a quick buck through promoting mysticism rather than knowledge..

Indian text books still subscribe to and harp on Aryan Invasion Theory, how sad.

In conclusion, playing the blame game is going to serve us, we need to take ownership of the mistakes of our past generations and move forward.

Kind Regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Tue, 8/4/09, Bhadraiah Mallampalli <vaidix at hotmail.com> wrote:


From: Bhadraiah Mallampalli <vaidix at hotmail.com>
Subject: [Advaita-l] Maxmuller et al
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Date: Tuesday, August 4, 2009, 9:16 AM



Dear Michael,



If you have read Mahabharata, you will realize that Maxmuller is no different from any other kuru warrior. Assuming he was a good hearted person and all documentation against him (or for that matter McCaulay) was fabricated, he was still working for an evil establishment. The western systems have their own "architecture" in which many good persons are employed to achieve an ultimate adharmic goal. 



On deeper inquiry it is not appropriate to compare Maxmuller with kuru warriors. Bhishma at one time honesly suggested to Dhrtarashtra that Duryodhana be executed for the conspiracy to kill pandavas. Maxmuller may not have taught clergy, but he knew his research could be used for other purposes, and somebody else did followed up based on his research. Secularism - separation of faith and administration - is only on paper to make sure same person is not publicly involved in conflicing activities. As in the case of Shrouta, in cases like this you have to weave through the infrastructure to realize the truth. 



Regards

Bhadraiah

_________________________________________________________________
Get free photo software from Windows Live
http://www.windowslive.com/online/photos?ocid=PID23393::T:WLMTAGL:ON:WL:en-US:SI_PH_software:082009
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org





