+++
title = "246 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2016-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040859.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040859.html)

It's been a while.  Apologies to those who had to wait a long time.




Swastik Banerjee
----------------

A research scholar of Philosophy. Masters from University of Madras, UG from 
Presidency College, Calcutta University. Masters specialisation in Advaita 
Vedanta.


Lakshman Velayutham
-------------------

I have been practising Advaita for the last 22 years with the primary 
objective of 'Aham Brahmasmi'. I have visited various schools of philosophy in 
my journey of building my conviction of the supreme truth. I now rest at the 
lotus feet of my Guru, Sri Sri Shankara Bharathi Swamiji, Peetadhipathi, 
Yadathore Math. By his grace and compassion, I now am firmly established in 
the supreme truth.


Sati Shankar
------------

Dr.S.S.D.Pandey, Ph.D., FRAS, recipient of Wagle Gold Medal and BHU Gold
Medal, Fellow of Royal Asiatic Society, (2007) (Great Britain & Ireland), is
an Indian, an economist, a researcher, author, academician, an International
Strategy & Management Professional.In the year 1990, he founded Institute
for Synergetics & Fundamental Research while  still a research student at
Banaras Hindu University Varanasi,which in 1992, formally became  the
"Global SynergeticÂ®, a Think Tank with a mission, and a non resident Indian
multinational entity now, that endeavours to clarify the misconceptions
which have been prevailing with human civilisation causing distructions,
injustice and sufferings for millennia and strives for World Peace. He also
founded Global Synergetic Institute as an integral non profit part of the
Global Synergetic, which focuses on the Eternal Wisdom (Sanatan Dharma),
Primordial and Perennial Wisdom and Social Order,Rights,Justice &
Developmental studies.


Suresh N
--------

I am interested in Advaita philosophy


Harish
------

I am a student who had the fortune of having the greatness of Advaita
described by some very learned people.


Ed Davidson
-----------

I have been interested in spiritual traditions starting with Chinese Taoism
in the middle 1970s.  I have been practicing Transcendental Meditation since
about 1982.  I now am very interested in non-duality and feel as though this
is the basis for much of the philosophical thought underlaying most if not
all major religions and traditions of the world.


Curtis J. Ultsch
----------------

A seeker who has found Advaita.


Jangchup Drolma
---------------

I am very interested in learning about Advaita Vedanta, and came across this
group in an internet search.


-- 
Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
