+++
title = "20 ஆமாச்சு"
date = "2019-11-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-November/053512.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-November/053512.html)

not sure if she was married but to follow vidhava dharma is in 
accordance to our traditions.

don't have great regards for Ramakrishna, Chinmaya, Arshavidya, 
Ishwareeya these people and their personal opinions and actions. least 
concerned.

On 08/11/19 11:06 AM, Bhaskar YR wrote:
> praNAms
> Hare Krishna
>
> Nothing strange!!  Though bonafide Amnaya mutts keeping their opinion reserve on these type of sensitive issues including vedAdhikAra to other dvija-s like kshatriya and Vaishya-s, modern day religious / spiritual institution guru-s are more flexible in giving the sannyasa initiation to women and changing their pUrvAshrama names.  Ramakrishna, Chinmaya, arshavidya, Ishwareeya etc. are some examples.  But I don’t know what ritual they follow to initiate women aspirants to sannyasa.
>
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
> bhaskar
>
> -----Original Message-----
> From: ஆமாச்சு <amachu at amachu.me>
> Sent: Friday, November 08, 2019 10:58 AM
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>; Daum Service <kuntimaddisada at yahoo.com>; Advaitin <advaitin at yahoogroups.com>
> Cc: Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Amma Swamini Swathmabodhananda Saraswathi no more.
>
> CAUTION: This email originated from outside of the organization. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe.
>
>
> That is strange to hear pre-asrama and post-ashrama for woman.
>
> On 06/11/19 4:18 PM, Bhaskar YR via Advaita-l wrote:
>> Yes, her pUrvAshrama name : Lakshmi Muthuswamy, she has her house in Malleshwaram 18th Cross.  She stayed at Shrungeri for some time as well.
