+++
title = "168 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-06-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024799.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-June/024799.html)



> On Thu, Jun 24, 2010 at 8:20 PM, Rajaram Venkataramani <
> rajaramvenk at gmail.com> wrote:
>
> Is there at least one verse in Bhagavad Gita which can be interpreted
> unambigously as evidence for advaitam?
>>
>>
>
>

Hari Om! Pranaams!

Swami Madhusudana Saraswatiji comments in his Gudartha Dipika --

tasyaivAham mamaivAsau sa evAhamiti tridhA.
bhagavatccharaNatvaM syAtsAdhanAbhyAsapAkataH..

With the maturity of spiritual practice three types of surrender to God come
about -- 'I belong to Him indeed', 'He belongs to me indeed' and 'I am He
indeed'.

According to the level of surrender, all the shastras will appear to convey
that meaning only.

Why single verse, even from entire verses depicting sahasranama, conclusion
cannot be achieved that it denotes one and the same person and that Narayana
only took all avatars whose thousand names they are.

It is not the problem of the shlokas.

If it is not a bad idea, instead of single verse, try to reconcile pairs of
verses like A) There is no time I, you, all these kings were not there & I
and you are born many times, B) No thing is born from any thing & My birth
is Divine, ....

If one has to accept Bhagavad Gita in its entirity, without resorting to
advaita it is impossible. What to talk if one want to understand its
purport?

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya





