+++
title = "196 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-04-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024336.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024336.html)

sAshtAnga praNAms Sri Vidya prabhuji
Hare Krishna

Sri Vidya prabhuji :

Bhaskar, please clarify the above. IYO, is Sankara bhagavatpAda accepting
jIva-jIva and jIveSvara bheda in special cases only, thereby contradicting
himself deliberately/unintentionally? 

>  Kindly pardon me if I am argumentative here with your goodself. What 
exactly can we derive from the literal meaning of this bhAshya vAkya?? 
(infact I had read this yAvadadhikArAdhikaraNa before mentioning the name 
'apAntaratama' to Sri subbu prabhuji)See, here shankara telling jnAni-s 
(ofcourse after Atma jnAna) are the 'followers' of IshwarAjna...and they 
are 'adhikArins' to do so!!  Dont you think prabhuji, even for the jnAni-s 
(who are again jeeva-s but with brahma jnAna) there is brahman in saguNa 
rUpa and this personalized brahman (saguNa brahman) is instructing these 
brahma jnAni-s to do jnAna prachAra??  I am not telling here jeeva-jeeva 
bheda & jeveshwara bheda and eternal 'saguNatva' of brahman are acceptable 
for shAnkara ONLY on special occassions!! have I said anywhere like 
that??...What I am trying to say here is as per literal reading of the 
bhAshya vAkya, in my opinion (kindly note IMO) it gives us the impression 
that jeeva-jeeva bheda, jeeva-Ishwara bheda & saguNatva of brahman are 
eternal as pAramArthika satya..IMO (I repeat IMO) we cannot say this bheda 
is in kevala vyAvahArika drushti, coz. we are taking about the pAramArtika 
status of SOME set of jnAni-s, who are still seeing & communicating with 
saguNa brahman even after jnAnOdaya & more importantly 'dEhapAta'. 

What do you mean by vAchyArtha of the commentary? 

> I mean plain reading of the bhAshya vAkya 'as it is'!!!

Do you mean that we have to apply a lakshaNArtha to the bhAshya in order 
to understand it so as to remove this contradiction? 

>  I think it is necessary to understand this bhAshya vAkya in such a way 
that it should not compromise advaita's parama siddhAnta i.e. Atmaikatva!! 




If so, what is this lakshaNArtha? 

>  Kindly pardon me I donot know the lakshyArtha...I am trying to convey 
the implications of literal reading of this bhAshya vAkya..

What does Sri SSS say about this sUtra and its bhAshya?

>  Nothing special in Sri SSS's Kannada translation prabhuji...But I donot 
know the need for bringing Sri SSS name here when I am saying 
It-Is-ONLY-in my opinion...Should I not get any doubts on my own 
prabhuji??

I will save my own thoughts on this adhikaraNa for later, but it seems to 
me that you are under a fundamental misunderstanding here.

>  Again, I did not claim that I am right in my observation, just I am 
stating my opinion based on plain reading of the bhAshya vAkya..If the 
vAchyArtha is giving us some special meaning apart from what I said with 
the example of 'eternal individuality of bubble in the water, kindly 
enlighten me prabhuji.

>  prabhuji, sadly, I regret to say, nowadays, there is an inadvertent 
hurried approach in your remarks on my mails..I wish I am wrong here 
anyway..

Your humble servant
Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

