+++
title = "181 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2016-12-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043754.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-December/043754.html)

Namaste Sri Venkatraghavan Ji,



Reg  << As you are aware, there are several views of kAla within advaita
darshana >>,



Let alone on kAla,  there are several advaita sidhAntas themselves apart
from the one advanced by sri Bhagavatpada. To name a few भावाद्वैत,
शब्दाद्वैत,  सत्ताद्वैत (bhAvAdvaita,  shabdAdvaita,  sattAdvaita) etc.
भावाद्वैत (bhAvAdvaita) is advocated by Sri Mandana Mishra, शब्दाद्वैत
(shabdAdvaita) is advocated by Bhartruhari etc. None of these is accepted
by Sri Bhagavatpada. Apart from this there are any number of instances
where views different from the Bhashya are taken on specific issues while
accepting the overall concepts of the Bhashya. When different views
prevalent in advaita sidhanta on specific topics are presented in different
works, it is not always made clear whether any or all of them are in
accordance with the one advanced by Sri Bhagavatpada. I face that
difficulty whenever I refer to Sidhantaleshasamgraha of Sri Appayya
Dikshitar himself.



You have referred to the work by Sri Subbaramiah. I have not read the same.
I am not sure if he has clarified on this point. You may please confirm. I
invariably like to go by the Bhashya only. In my understanding Sri
Bhagavatpada does not admit of any entity other than mAya/avidya (of course
ascribibng various alternate names to it ) prior to Creation. And all other
nAma-rUpAs including kAla are products of mAya/avidya only.



You have also referred to Suta Samhita and commentary of Swami Vidyaranya
on the same. While I have not read the same, I think it should be possible
to interpret the commentary in line with the Bhashya ( Sri Bhagavatpada ).
I cannot imagine Swami Vidyaranya taking any such major deviation from the
Bhashya.



Regards
