+++
title = "38 Sundaresan, Vidyasankar (GE Infra,\tWater)"
date = "2008-12-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-December/021007.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-December/021007.html)

This is a public note, in my capacity as moderator of this list, to all
current participants on "The True Nature of Advaita" - please put an end
to this thread immediately. The moderators (Jaldhar Vyas, Ravi Mayavaram
and I) will intimate further notifications separately, if necessary.

To Dr. Panigrahi: Please note that it is not very fruitful to take a
highly combative stance with existing members of a mailing list from the
day you join it. There is also no need to see a south Indian bias to
things here. Just to give one example, Jaldhar Vyas, one of the
moderators, who has already taken exception to some of your statements,
is not a south Indian. There are many more members of the list, from
around the entire world, who are silent, either out of compassion or out
of non-interest in this thread and the way it is progressing.

The Advaita-L list is dedicated to discussions of the advaita vedAnta
philosophical tradition. Naturally, a highly personalized and
non-traditional approach like yours, based on numerology, is not going
to be accepted. Please limit your posts to the list to discussions of
Advaita philosophy and philosophers. Do remember that it is not
necessary to fill everyone's email inbox with details of events in your
daily life. We are all, in our own ways, trying to live our lives
according to the teachings of our philosophy. If we started writing it
all down in emails to this list, the result can only be chaos.

To everyone else: please resist the temptation to respond immediately to
new posts in this thread. We can afford to be a little more forgiving of
other people's faults, real and perceived.

A little Christmas spirit never hurt anyone (I didn't think I'd ever say
this on this list! :-) )

Vidyasankar Sundaresan
Moderator, Advaita-L

