+++
title = "106 D.V.N.Sarma"
date = "2003-07-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011997.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011997.html)

According to advaita "moksha" is siddha, i.e, it is already there.
It is not sAdhya, i.e., something to be achieved.
Anything that can be achieved is something which one thinks is 
external to himself and can therefore be thought to be lost also
at a later time.

If nirvikalpa samAdhi is something which you enter and then come 
out, you cannot call it liberation.

The objection to yoga by advaitins is that it is based on suppression
of mental processes ( citta vritti nirOdha).
A person in a state of supression cannot be called liberated.

But if the word nirOdha is interpreted as cessation of the
mental processes (because you realize that you are and have 
everything and hence no desires (AptakAmasya kA spRhA) and 
therefore no mental activity to achieve it (sarvArambha parityAga)), 
it is alright.

regards,
Sarma.




On 28 Jul 2003, at 18:53, venkata subramanian wrote:

> 
> When a Jnani like Sri Jagadguru Chandra Shekara Bharathi Mahaswamiji has commented on Vivekachudamani, and when a Jnani like Bhagawan Sri Ramana Maharishi has translated the work in prose style in Tamil, When a Jnani like Paramacharya Sri Chandra Shekarendra Saraswathi Mahaswamigal of the 
Kumbakonam Math has spent pages in the Deivathin kural,
> 
> there is no doubt that the work is so Good and charming.   There is no doubt in this regard.
> 
> Regarding the style of writing, it may be only a minor detail, But when pointers like - for example, by Mickel Comans - that the extolling of Samadhi even as superior to Shravana, which direclty stands against the relevant Adhikarana Bhashya in the IV Chapter in the Shariraka Sutra Bhashya, 
this has something in it, that one may be interested to note.  What have the commentaries to say ?!   How can this be a mere teaching to Adhikarai Bheda !!?!
> 
> To have the benchmark of Brahma Sutra Bhashya is not ignorance !  What will be the Central Theme - Authentic !  Not Agnosticism !!  Some thing concrete - Tradition has to be there, which is accepted Universally as the Brahma Sutra Bhashya.   That is why he is a Bhashya Kara.  Any thing not 
contradicting this Central Theme of the Vedanta of the Upanishads, as taught by the Jagadguru in his Brahma Sutra Bhashya - is the tradition.  On even a prima facie study of Sri Chandra Shekara Bharathi Mahaswamiji's Sanskrit Commentary, one may see how frequently he draws souces mainly from the 
Brahma Sutra Bhashya to prove the tenets !  Because, the Jagadguru teaches the tradition.
> 
>  
> 
> 
> Thanks & Regards,
> Venkat.
> 
> Sadgurubhyo Namah.
> 
> ---------------------------------
> Do you Yahoo!?
> Yahoo! SiteBuilder - Free, easy-to-use web site design software
> _______________________________________________
> want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> Need assistance? Contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> 


