+++
title = "194 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2016-04-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040747.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2016-April/040747.html)

Source: Speaking Tree, TIMES, Author: Sh. Narayana Swamis Jybthish & Devi
Dear Friends,           Paramahamsa Yogananda , [author of famous book, 'autobiography of Yogi', Founder of Self-Realization society of India, Disciple of Swami Yukeswar girl who is disciple of Lahiri Mahasaya of benares, who in turn sushi of the kriya yoga teacher, Indian Master himalayan guru, none other than, Mahavatar BabaJi] said that we should think of work as active meditation and Meditation as inward service and our daily activities , meditation are not separate from each other. They are two aspects of spiritual path. Here are some tips on how to do that.1. Remember God while your work.2.Consiously serve as a channel for the divine3.Be calmly active & actively calm4.Prioritise your daily actives.
In order to establish the right balance between your work and spiritual life, It is very important to prioritise your daily activities. The first priority should be to meditate when you get up in the morning and before you go to the bed in the night. Taking a calm, more expanded consciousness into sleep will make your sleep more restful and uplifting. 
Paramahansa (i.e supreme swan) Yogananda said that we should also leave time for reading, study, perhaps for writing in a journal & for laughter and Fun. It is important to leave time for the right time of relaxation, a walk in nature, an uplifting a movie or book; uplifting and relaxing times with friends. For some people, finding hobies that enable them to be alone and to relax deeply is also very important part of life. At the end of your day, try not to take your home work with you. I mean to say that one should leave the house issues at house and Office issues at Office only, mixing of these two things causes disturbance, turmoil and gets into troubles.Thanks & regardsKameshDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
