+++
title = "134 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2010-05-16"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-May/024545.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-May/024545.html)

Rajaram Venkataramani

I come from a smartha family and completed reading Mahabharaha and Bhagavad 
Gita at the age of 6. I had the aspiration of becoming a Sankaracharya at 12 
but abandoned it due to circumstances! I became an atheist and hedonist at 18. 
And became interested in gaudiya vaishnavam at 24. I worship Adi Sankara and 
most of the times think that advaitam is true. But at times, I am not so sure. 
I am interested in truth that transcends traditions and hope to learn from 
scholars here and contribute through questions.



Ramesh Patel

After a B.A. and an M.A. in Sanskrit at tbe University of Bombay, I pursued 
doctoral research in Rigveda, Nyaya and modern analytic philosophy.  I ended 
up studying Western philosophy at the University of New Mexico, earning 
another M.A. and a Ph.D., this time in Western philosophy.  I have taught at 
several universities and colleges in the U.S.A.  I retired in 2002, after 
teaching at Antioch College for 25 years, as Professor of Philosophy and 
Religion.  I have taught Eastern and Western religions and philosophy, 
meditation, mysticism, music theory, personal finance and investments.  I have 
taught about seventy different courses in philosophy and religious studies. 
My book, Philosophy of the Gita, was published in 1990 by Peter Lang, New 
York.  I am in the process of writing several books, particularly, Hinduism 
for today, meta-philosophy and Gandhi's thought.  I offer voluntary classes at 
the Dayton Hindu Temple on the Gita, Hinduism and the Upanishads.  More can be 
found about me on my website called www.hinduismfortoday.com.  I will be happy 
to communicate and enter into a discourse with any thoughtful reader.

-- 
Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>

