+++
title = "87 Vaidya N. Sundaram"
date = "1998-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-April/008427.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-April/008427.html)

On Wed, 8 Apr 1998, Ram Chandran wrote:

> or Advaita in your article.  This posting raises lots of questions on
> the scope of topics for this list.  If we accept this article and reject
> an article on Buddha, we become morally corrupt. Someone can point out
> that we are a group of narrow-minded folks discriminating over some

Namaste:
 I beg to disagree. Sri Sankara is considered as Shiva incarnate. I hope
there is no doubt about that. He incarnated so that Vaidika matham ( a
religion based on the Vedas) does not die away. And, Sri Sankara has
infact referred in-numerable times to Shiva. Now, discussion about
Jyotirlinga's, though not "ADVAITA", is part of the tradition we so often
refer to. Meditation of Shiva's auspicious forms is in itself, very
auspicious and can safely be considered to foster Bhakti.

 On the other hand, Sri Sankara has refuted Buddhist teachings as wrong
and misleading and should not be given importance as a religious
doctrine.

 Keeping these in mind, let us also keep in mind that "discrimination" is
at the heart of our advaitic apirations. I sincerely think using our
"discrimination" to say Yes to Jyotirlinga discussion and No to Buddhist
teachings is very much in line with the stated purpose of this list.

 Please, let us not be dogmatic about issues. Each one of us in this list
is more than capable of deciding which topics merit discussion and which
do not. The way I see it, Ravi's ADMIN mails were meant to make us all
exercise this discrimination.

Cheers,
Vaidya.


                      Vaidya N. Sundaram

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Kandavar Vindilar      : Those who have seen (Brahman) have not spoken
  Vindavar Kandilar     :   those who speak (about It) have not seen (It)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    satyakAma, satyasaMkalpa, Apatsakha, kAkutsa, shrIman nArAyANa
        puruShottaMa, shrI ranganAtha, mama nAtha, namostute.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

