+++
title = "174 Durga Prasad Janaswamy"
date = "2019-10-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053322.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053322.html)

 *Phoenix Gita Vedanta Group & **Arsha Vidya Gurukulam *

present

*Shri Swami Tattvavidananda Saraswatiji *


The Phoenix Gita Vedanta Group, under the aegis of Arsha Vidya Gurukulam,
is conducting an extended Vedanta Camp by Shri Swami Tattvavidananda
Saraswatiji


*SCHEDULE*

*Dates: *October 15th – November 10th


*Location: *North Phoenix area.  Exact location(s) to be finalized


Topics:

Selected Verses and Satsang with Swamiji (Mornings)

Atma Nishtha (abidance in the Self) based on Gita Chapter 18 verses: 50 to
55  with Sankara Bhashya(Evenings)


Daily Schedule:

10:30 AM – 11:30AM: Morning Discourse

11:45AM – 12:30 PM: Lunch

6:30PM – 7:30 PM: Evening Discourse

7:45 PM – 8:30 PM: Dinner



*We encourage you to please forward this information generously to other
people you know who may be interested.  *




 *Please register at: *

https://tinyurl.com/swamitv-phx-2019-reg




 *If you have any questions or issues with the registration process, please
contact *

*Phoenix Gita Vedanta Group (phx.gita.vedanta at gmail.com
<phx.gita.vedanta at gmail.com>), Kishore Narayan
(623-694-0502,narayan.kishore at gmail.com <narayan.kishore at gmail.com>),
Singli Surandran (602-751-9337, mail2suren at yahoo.com
<mail2suren at yahoo.com>), or Jayanthi Sankar (480-238-4655,
jaysurandran at yahoo.com <jaysurandran at yahoo.com>) *

*We are planning to provide free accommodation to out of town guests for
the duration of the camp. We will be catering lunch and dinner. Expected
cost is $15/day per person. *



 *Mahamahopadhyaya Swami Tattvavidanandaji is a true Pandita in both,
classical and modern sense. He started his Vedantic studies as a child
under the tutelage of his father, also a mahamahopadhyaya. At the age of 11
he began modern academic studies, and after securing first rank in BSc and
MSc from Andhra University, he went on to finish his Ph.D. in Chemistry
under the world renowned Indian Scientist, Dr. Sukh Dev. *

*During his successful scientific career, spanning almost two decades,
Swamiji continued the study and teaching of Vedanta and was bestowed with a
Gold Medal and a second doctorate, this time in Sanskrit. He continued his
studies with many great Vedanta scholars finally under the tutelage of
Pujya Swami Dayanandaji, some Twenty-five years ago. *

*Most vednata scholars consider Swamiji as a world authority on Shankara
Bhashya. He has been invited to teach Vedanta at various locations in the
US, Bahamas and India for over thirty years. To this day, he has been much
applauded for his 8 months course on Mandukya Upanishad at Arsha Vidya
Gurukulam, Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania. *

*He has a unique style of teaching that can be called as multi dimensional.
Having vast and in-depth knowledge of many vedanta related fields such as
Sanskrit, Philosophy, Science, Psychology, History and Literature, he is
able to resonate with scholars of different backgrounds. *

*Swamiji has written more than 70 books on Vedanta in
English/Sanskrit/Telugu. With his rich store of knowledge, his cheerful,
unaffected manner, and his eagerness to share, Swami Tattvavidanandaji is a
highly appreciated and beloved teacher. Swamiji is a rare combination of
knowledge (vidya) and humility (Vinaya). In Sanskrit language he can be
called as a true Shrotriya and Brahmanishtha. *
