+++
title = "72 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2011-01-11"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-January/026347.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-January/026347.html)

I would like to remind members that till Svetaketu prohibited it, an athidhi
(guest)
was given not only food but the householder's wife for the night. It was one
of the
duties enjoined on the householders.

In Mahabharata we hear that Agni (Fire God) exempting women of
one city from the sin promiscuity. Some countries were known for their loose
morals.
But they were still in the hindu fold.

Hindu society has evolved through different stages. Dharma is not static. It
depends
location (country), time (epoch) and deha dharma(bodily health).

As far as tantric practices are concerned I would like remind members the
admonition
of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa to Swami Vivekananda "That there can be back
doors
to a house".

regards,
Sarma.

On Tue, Jan 11, 2011 at 10:24 PM, Praveen R. Bhat <bhatpraveen at gmail.com>wrote:

> Apologies, I'll not even qualify this thread with a salutation. This is one
> of the most ridiculous books I've ever come across and needless to say none
> of those involved in it, including the author of its "Prefatory Note": Max
> Muller, seem to know what they are talking about!  I stopped skimming
> through the book, when I came across the following:
>
> 1 The Sanskrit word is Varna = colour, thus showing that upon the
> difference of colour between the Aryan Brahmins and the aboriginal
> inhabitants the distinction of caste was originally founded. — Pope.
>
> Moreover, there's no way that these clueless author(s) would have come
> across a tantrik ritual in "all its glory" considering its utmost secrecy
> and the time that the book seems to be have been cooked-up. Those pages
> clearly read like some drunkard was narrating them, without a clue of what
> he's talking and someone jotted them down. Some tantrik rituals do involve
> all that is considered outside the social norms we know, but these are
> described properly in relevant books written by at least those guided by
> ones trained in tantra. If I were to read something even for my
> inquisitiveness, be it the most extreme tantra following of aghora, and
> even
> so, by a foreign author, I'd go with Robert Svoboda. Svoboda really spent
> time learning things related from those trained, understood them and then
> went on to write.
>
> In short, the book linked in your mail as a whole is disgusting, let alone
> its description of "rituals". You may take wildest of guesses on what the
> intention of the authors was and still you have more chances of being right
> about them than the authors were on the subject broached by them. :)
>
> Kind rgds,
> --Praveen R. Bhat
> /* Through what should one know That owing to which all this is known!
> [Br.Up. 4.5.15] */
>
>
> On Tue, Jan 11, 2011 at 9:30 PM, Venkatesh Murthy <vmurthy36 at gmail.com
> >wrote:
>
> > Many think Tantric rituals allow prohibited acts like men and women
> > enjoying  in a group.A man is allowed to enjoy another man's wife.
> > This Maithuna by groups allowed in Tantric books? If it is in books
> > what is meaning behind this?  Is it bad propaganda by anti Hindu
> > people and Christians? They wrote of Sakti Puja and Namadhari
> > Vaishnavas doing these Vamachara acts.
> >
> > Reference-
> >
> > Page 286 to 288 DISGUSTING RELIGIOUS ORGIES
> >
> >
> http://ia700407.us.archive.org/24/items/hindumannerscust1906dubo/hindumannerscust1906dubo_djvu.txt
> >
> > Regards
> >
> > -Venkatesh
> > _______________________________________________
> > Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> > http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
> >
> > To unsubscribe or change your options:
> > http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> >
> > For assistance, contact:
> > listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> >
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

