+++
title = "146 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "1997-05-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006450.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1997-May/006450.html)

Dear list members,

This is an information posting about the Atirudra Mahayagnam to be held
towards the end of summer in Pennsylvania, USA. If anybody would like to
have the official flyer for the Yagnam, please reply to me with your
mailing address.

With best wishes,

S. Vidyasankar

---------------------------------------------------------------

With the blessings of the Jagadguru Sankaracharya of Sringeri Sarada
Peetham, the Sringeri Vidya Bharati Foundation (USA) will be conducting a
grand Ati Rudra Maha Yagnam at the Sringeri Sadhana Center, in
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, from August 22 to September 1, 1997.

The Sri Rudram chant is an ancient Vedic hymn, and is the oldest example
of a listing of various names of Lord Siva. Through the chanting of Sri
Rudram, Lord Siva's various attributes and aspects are invoked and
worshipped. Chanting the Rudram is considered to be of great benefit.

The Rudram chanting can be done with or without the accompaniment of a
Vedic yagna ritual. For example, during the abhishekam to the
Chandramauliswara lingam at Sringeri, the Rudram is chanted, followed by
the elaborate daily puja. When accompanied with the Vedic fire ritual, it
is called Rudra Homam or the Rudra Yagnam.

Eleven recitations of the Sri Rudram followed by one recitation of the
camakam is called Ekadasa Rudram. This also constitutes one unit of the
Rudra Homam. Eleven Ekadasa Rudram recitations make one Laghu Rudram.
Eleven Laghu Rudram recitations make a Maharudram and eleven Maharudram
recitations is the Ati Rudram. Thus, in the Ati Rudra Maha Yagnam, the Sri
Rudram hymn will be recited 14641 times, with the performance of 1331
Rudra Homams by 121 Ritwik priests. This will be the first time that a
Vedic yagna of such magnitude will be conducted in the United States. 121
Vaidikas, among them some settled in the US, will participate and will be
honored at this event.

If you are interested in participating in the ceremonies as a ritwik,
please contact the organizers by phone or email. Under the instructions of
the Jagadguru Sankaracharya of Sringeri Peetham, the organizers request
that you must have learned Vedic recitation from a proper guru (not from
recordings/books), and that you must be prepared to commit to the standard
niyamas required of a vaidika priest. Of course, you must also spend all
the eleven days (August 22 - September 1) at the Yagna site. Accommodation
will be provided by the Sringeri Vidya Bharati Foundation.

Along with the Ati Rudram, other traditional ceremonies, such as Ganapati
Homam, Navagraha Homam, Lalita Homam, Mrityunjaya Homam and Sri Sukta
Homam will also be performed at the same time.

Every Vedic ritual requires yajamanas or sponsors, both as primary
beneficiaries of the ritual and to meet the expenses incurred. Please
contact one of the following:

                           Dr. S. S. Iyer - 908 238 1119
                    Dr. S. Yegna Subramanian - 609 530 0299
                  Mr. T. R. Ramchandran - 908 457 0200 (x110)
                     Or, send email to: rudram at hotmail.com

Check the Ati Rudram home page at the URL <http://www.asanet.com/sringeri>
for more contact information and other details.

Contributions in US dollars (tax-deductible in the USA), payable to SVBF -
Athi Rudram Account, may be mailed to the Sringeri Vidya Bharati
Foundation. Donations in Indian rupees, payable to Sri Sharada Peetham,
Sringeri, may be mailed to the office of the Sringeri Peetham. These will
be used for priest expenses (sambhavana) and towards the purchase and
transport of puja items from India.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

