+++
title = "300 Anand Hudli"
date = "2017-08-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046585.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046585.html)

Shri Venkatraghavanji,

>>
Ok, fair enough. I think we can say there is nivritti of dream by waking
and waking by dream. That equivalence is acceptable. In both cases, kArya
nivritti happens, but kAraNa nivritti does not. In the case of shukti
rajata, both kArya and kAraNa nivritti happen. Perhaps the solution is to
simply say that kAraNa nivritti is not a requirement for bAdha in driShTi
sriShTi.
>>

The example of pot being struck  by a hammer and leaving behind the clay
(kAraNa) and saying the clay will be destroyed only with brahmajnAna, is a
vyAvahArika example. If you recall, this is the definition of vyavahArika
sattA- brahma-pramA-atirikta-abadhyatve sati sattvena pratItyarhaM
cidbhinnam. Now, what happens in DSV (where dream and waking objects are
prAtibhAsika) is that the pot seen in a dream (or waking) gets destroyed
upon termination of the dream (or going to sleep). And there is no kAraNa
(the clay) being left behind either, after completion of the dream (or
going to sleep). So this is bAdha. If so, how do we justify
jnAna-nivartyatva? The jnAna here, in my opinion, is the general awareness
of being in the waking state (or dream). It is because of the awareness of
being awake that the dream objects are false. So the waking state awareness
negates dream objects and vice-versa. There is thus jnAna-nivartyatva of
both types of objects. This is how I see the jnAna-nivartyatva definition
of mithyAtva being applied to DSV.

Anand



>
