+++
title = "304 Amuthan"
date = "2006-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015822.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-January/015822.html)

namo nArAyaNAya!

kR^iShNa now concludes his brief description of the
self and advises arjuna not to grieve,

avyakto.ayamachintyo.ayamavikAryo.ayamuchyate.
tasmAdenaM viditvainaM nAnushochitumarhasi.. 2.25

this (self) is said to be unmanifest, unthinkable and
immutable. knowing it to be (of) such (nature), you
ought not grieve (for the self).

an entity is said to be manifest if it is pratyakSha
to the senses. since the self is beyond the ken of the
senses, it is said, by the veda-s, to be avyakta
(unmanifest). since it is not pratyakSha, it is not
the content of any anumAna (inference). in other
words, the mind cannot think about it. hence, it is
said to be achintya (unthinkable). finally, it is said
to be avikArya (immutable) since it is niravayava
(without any parts) and nirguNa (without any
qualities) and hence cannot undergo any change. since
all our languages are based on pratyakSha and anumAna,
it follows that the self cannot be described by words.

knowing the self thus, to be distinct from the body
and to be unchanging when the body undergoes various
changes, it does not befit us to grieve over it. the
purpose of repeatedly teaching the nature of the self
in various ways is to remove the false notions of the
self that we have which are the causes for our grief
and delusions. 

vAsudevaH sarvaM,
aparyAptAmR^itaH.




__________________________________________________________ 
Yahoo! India Matrimony: Find your partner now. Go to http://yahoo.shaadi.com

