+++
title = "141 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2011-03-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-March/026739.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-March/026739.html)

Namaste Sriram:

Can you please post the details abut the yaj~na you have mentioned if they are available?

Can you comment of reproducibility, specificity. precision of this methodology of this yaj~na?

Is there any documentation that can validate this?

Thanks

Dr. Yadu



--- On Fri, 3/18/11, Venkata sriram P <venkatasriramp at yahoo.in> wrote:

From: Venkata sriram P <venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>
Subject: [Advaita-l] idaM na mama
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Date: Friday, March 18, 2011, 9:49 AM


What is Jnana Yajna? Is it a mere intellectual enquiry of “Who Am I” 
which gives the answer “The same old fool”. 

Mahamahopadhyaya Uppuluri Ganapati Sastry of Andhra Desa, 
who needs no introduction, was nityAgnihotri. He was an 
expert in Varuna Yaga and Kanchi Mahaswamigal used to seek
his supervision wherever any Varuna Yaga needs to be performed. 
In 1972, Tirumala hills suffered with famineand the gogarbham
Tank went dry without water. Shri Ganapati Sastry performed 
Varuna Yaga for 3 days and on 3rd day, there was a heavy downpour
on Tirumala Hills only and nowhere else.

So, what did Ganapati Sastry gain out of this yajna. Practically nothing!!
But he offered his mantra bala and tapas to save people of Tirumala from
Famine and lack of water.This is Yajna. 

Before making such blatant remarks on yajna, please contemplate
on the verse of bhagavat gita “ekatvena prithaktvena bahudhA 
vishvatomukhaM”.

Regs,
Sriram


_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




