+++
title = "104 Dr. P.K. Nair"
date = "2002-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/004083.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-November/004083.html)

Srikanth,

There was a news item in one of the Indian papers two weeks ago, this
Adhojakshajananda hit someone with his staff in Houston when confronted.
Adhojakshajananda returned to India according to the newspaper. I saw the
article in India Post. I understand that it is there in India Today as well.

PKN
----- Original Message -----
From: Srikrishna Ghadiyaram <srikrishna_ghadiyaram at YAHOO.COM>
To: <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
Sent: Wednesday, November 20, 2002 2:34 AM
Subject: Fake Sankaracharya


Hari Om !!

Recently I visit Livermore Temple of California when I got a mail that
Sankaracharya of Puri was visiting  US.

Now I am surprised to know that Swami Adhojakshajananda is a fake imposter
going around India and around the world in the name of Sankaracharya of
Puri with the funding from Muslim Organizations, creating a divide in
Hindus.

We Advaitins have done nothing to STOP this imposter maligning the
institution of Sankaracharya.  There seems to be more than what we know.
None alerted on this list or otherwise.

This information seems to be important to know, by the
believers of the Sankaracharya institution. Please
read the info at the following link.

http://hsita.cjb.net/

What can we do ? I know there are very many people on this list who know
acharyas in the Sringeri and Kanchi Mathas. Please write to them to drawup
a comprehensive plan to END this imposter Sankaracharya, collectively. If
they do not do it now, a similar situation  may happen to those
institutions and also such perils may come in other unknown ways and harm
our society in more ways.

Om Namo Narayanaya !!

Srikrishna

