+++
title = "193 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "2007-03-24"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-March/018534.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-March/018534.html)

>
>   Normally it is said, "na karmaNA na prajayA dhanena thyAge naike 
>amruthathvamAnaSuh". After sacrificing all karmas, sanyasa is taken.  it is 
>interesting information to note  that still they are ordained to indulge in 
>so many actions, viz., perform   "Yogasana" (to keep their body fit !) ; 
>teach "AmagnyAna" and deliver "pravachanas"!
>

Some rules are laid down for those who take to saMnyAsa out of a desire to 
know brahman and thereby get liberated. sureSvarAcArya makes it clear in 
naishkarmyasiddhi that one should renounce all karma along with its 
accessories (karma tat sAdhana saMnyAsaH), but then practices yoga (tato 
yogAbhyAsaH) to gain inward mental focus (tataS cittasya pratyak pravaNatA), 
which then aids one to properly realize the knowledge conveyed through the 
mahAvAkya-s (tatas tat tvam asyAdi mahAvAkyArtha parijnAnam) the removal of 
ignorance (tato 'vidyocchedaH) and the establishment in the own Atman 
(svAtmany eva avasthAnam).

It is a mistake to think that the saMnyAsin has to practice yogAsana only to 
keep the body fit. The maTha or ASrama is not a modern yoga studio. Any 
physical fitness that is imparted through the practise of yoga is a side 
benefit, not the main purpose of the saMnyAsin's practice. The purpose of 
Asana-s is explained well in the brahmasUtra "AsInas sambhavAt."

Please see 
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/018459.html 
for a recent discussion on the nature and place of the rules on Asana-s etc. 
However, there is no general rule that the saMnyAsin then has to teach and 
deliver pravacana-s. No rules apply to the highest brahmajnAnI.

Regards,
Vidyasankar

_________________________________________________________________
5.5%* 30 year fixed mortgage rate. Good credit refinance. Up to 5 free 
quotes - *Terms 
https://www2.nextag.com/goto.jsp?product=100000035&url=%2fst.jsp&tm=y&search=mortgage_text_links_88_h2a5d&s=4056&p=5117&disc=y&vers=910


