+++
title = "209 bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com"
date = "2007-03-29"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-March/018555.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-March/018555.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

People have not found flaws in it for 700 years already, so I doubt if
there are any. In any case, my personal reading shows quite no flaws (for
whatever that's worth).

>  I dont know what sort of argument is this!!!  I've been seeing arguments
like this ever since the term saMpradAya has taken the centre stage with
regard to dialectical issues...Argument often goes like :

> Since after shankara, for the past 1200 years nobody find any problem
with vyAkhyAna-s, even now nobody should be allowed to analyse it
objectively.  If anybody makes that attempt with a genuine interest in it,
give him the tag of *asaMpradAyavAdi*  & throw him out!!

> Since no traditional achArya for the past 700 years found any flaws in
traditional texts...it should be damn right in every aspect of it...if
anybody tries to do any postmortem of these texts with an analytical view
point...call him/her *asaMpradAyavAdi* & throw him out!!!

>  The fundamental question that needs to be answered here  is how many
Acharya-s/teachers  in the traditional lineage have taken this task of
finding out truth/facts behind these texts??  how many Acharyas reconciled
glaring contradictions in shankara's biography available in 16 & odd
different versions??  If someone, who has dedicated whole of his life for
shankara's advaita vedanta & related works, taken this task with a genuine
interest of finding the truths behind it...is he doing an unpardonable
crime here??  if nobody finds any problem with the texts in the traditional
circle ..what he could do for that?? is it his problem??

>  IMHO, arguments like above are nothing better than sticky traditional
fanaticism...

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



