+++
title = "53 G. Kameshwar"
date = "2006-05-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016477.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-May/016477.html)

Dear Sri Kameswararao

  The classic treatise of Kavayakanta Ganapati Muni that you have referred to is "Uma Sahasram" . It is a compiltation of thousand verses on Uma, and is not a namavali. Set in forty chapters of twenty five verses each, each chapter in a different metre, the treatise is considered to be a crest-jewel of Devi Upasana.

  Uma Sahasram Sanskrit Text in Devanagari and with English
transliteration is available in Volume 1 of "Collected Works of
Vasishta Kavyakantha Ganapathi Muni", edited by Sri K Natesan, a
disciple of the Muni. The book was released in 2003, and is published
by Sri Ramanashramam, Tiruvannamalai.  

  As regards commentaries: 

  Sri Kapali Shastri wrote a commentary in Sanskrit. Sri Lakshmi Narayana Shastry of Vizianagaram had written aTelugu translation and commentary in the 40s. Please see this link http://www.archive.org/details/UmaSahasramuVolIi . I do not know Telugu and havent checked that link.

  I have seen an English verse by verse translation as well, done soemone from Andhra (I do not recall the name). Sri MP Pandit, disciple of Kapali Shastri, has translated selected verses from Uma Sahasram in his book "Adoration of Divine Mother" which should be available with Aurobindo Ashram.

There is also an audio cassette of selections from Uma Sahasram, set in music and sung by a group in Bangalore, very melodious. This has been produced by "SAKSI OF VEDIC CULTURE", 109, 8th B Main, Jayanagar, Bangalore - 11)

  Best Regards

  G Kameshwar


>Message: 8
>Date: Tue, 2 May 2006 10:07:14 +0100 (BST)>
>From: KAMESWARARAO MULA 
>Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] : Bhawani Sahasranama / UMA SAHASRANAMA
>To: satisharigela at yahoo.com, A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta

Message-ID: <20060502090714.42510.qmail at web8511.mail.in.yahoo.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1

>Dear Friends,
>Thanks to satish Arigela for giving the links of bhavani sahasranam in devnagari >script. I could able to find the same in telugu from stotralahari.com just a few days >back.

>I would like to know can any body give the details and Importance of 
>UMA SAHASRANAMA. This is the work done by Kavya Kantha Vaista Ganapati >Muni garu (Nayana), who is the greatest disciple of Bhavgavan Raman maharshi and >who also gave the name " Bhagavan Ramana Maharashi" to Brahaman swami >venkata ramana.

>if any body having the full text of Uma Sahasranama , Pelase post it through our >forum. If any one wants to telugu text of Bhavani sahasranam, I can post it.

>with regards
>Kamesh
>M. Kameswara Rao
>Scientist
>DRDE
>Gwalior-474002




---------------------------------
Yahoo! Messenger with Voice. PC-to-Phone calls for ridiculously low rates.

