+++
title = "15 M. S. Ravisankar"
date = "2003-07-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011890.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-July/011890.html)

Kartik:

Thank you very much for posting the excerpt 
from the book "The Saint of Sringeri".  
The following words are indeed a great blessing.


" >It may help you to understand a few of the
> thoughts; it may familiarise you with such terms as
> Maya, Atma and so on which are met with frequently in
> such books. And the impressions so got may be somewhat
> useful when really you acquire the competency. That is
> all. For this, one may read it. "


> -----Original Message-----
> From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> [mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org]On Behalf Of S
> Jayanarayanan
> Sent: Monday, June 30, 2003 7:18 PM
> To: advaita-l
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] BSB Discussion - Prerequisites
> 
> 

> H.H: What doubt is there? That is why the Sastras say
> "saMnyasya shravaNaM kuryAt.h" "Study the Vedanta
> after taking Sannyasa".
> 
> G: Does it not tantamount to expressly prohibiting
> householders from a study of Vedanta?
> 
> H.H: Not necessarily so. The four qualifications are
> imperatively necessary for those who want to know
> Brahman. You do not want to know Brahman; you want
> only to know what the book says. It is only curiosity
> that impels you to look into it and not any other
> motive. Your reading will not lead to knowledge of
> Brahman. It may help you to understand a few of the
> thoughts; it may familiarise you with such terms as
> Maya, Atma and so on which are met with frequently in
> such books. And the impressions so got may be somewhat
> useful when really you acquire the competency. That is
> all. For this, one may read it. 
> -------------------
> 

