+++
title = "70 Anbu sivam2"
date = "2010-01-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-January/023402.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-January/023402.html)

Sivaanandalahari -61 (6)continued from 61 (5)

PraaNis due to bhEdhagnyaana have the tendency to have the anubhava that
'aathmaa is different and Paramasiva is different, aathmaa is
dhukkaswaroopi, only paramasiva is aanandhamayam' but they do not yearn to
approach a sathguru and fall at his feet and have the benefit of vichaaram
from him.  They do not realize that the love they have for the wife and
children is only so long as they derive aanandha from them.  So is the case
with hatred that one has only so long as they suffer dhukkam from them.  The
one is who is loved at one time is hated at another.  That which exists at
one time and does not exist at another is called 'braanthi' by the
vEdhaanthis.  Those sukham and dhukkam that arise out of this braanthi is
called anithyaanandham.  On the contrary there is unfailing prEma on one's
own self. That is why in Bhagavath Geetha (6.22) it is said: "yam labdhva
chaaparamlaabham manyatenaadhikam tata:" there is no greater gain than
aathmalaabham.  That is because it is the only aanandha vasthu. Enjoying
this aanandha vasthu as Paramasiva is known as MOksham.

'rasOvaisa:' By this sruthi that Brahman which is taught as the rasa and
that rasa's swaanubhavam is the swaroopam of ParamEswara.  This
brahmaanandha rasam is that to be surrendered at the feet of ParamEswara so
the cause of sakala dwaitha gnyaanam namely the mind is destroyed by those
holy feet bringing about an experience of the prathyagaathma swaroopam of
Paramasiva yielding a nirvikalpa aanandha preethi is the truest bhakthi.  It
is the paramakaashtai of bhakthi says sarvagnyaaL ParamaacharyaaL
‘swaswaroopaanusandhaanam bhakthirithyamidheeyathE’. Bhagavaan Ramana says
in his famous UpadhEsa Saaram: “HruthsthalE mana: swasthathaa kriya,
bhakthiyOgabhOdhaascha nischitham’. Sinking the mind (the source of bhEdha
gnaanam) into the Heart (ParamEswara), is Karma Yoga, Bhakthi Yoga, Raja
Yoga and Gnaana Yoga.

This in essence is the import of this sloka of Sivaanandalahari.

Jaya Jaya Sankara, Hara Hara Sankara!

