+++
title = "48 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2012-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-December/033656.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-December/033656.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

This is the purport: It is true that the entirety of the jivas, being My
amshas, will resolve into Me during deep sleep and dissolution and
therefore they 'attain' Me.  Yet, owing to the fact that the jiva-s are
under the spell of AvidyA, owing to the continuance of avidyA, they 
resolve
into My prakRti-associated form (another word could be: mAyAshabalite 
mayi)
and NOT My Pure form (uncontaminated by mAyA). 


>  If the jeeva's resolve into brahma is mAyAshabalita brahman in sushupti 
and praLaya, during those times this type of brahma is contaminated with 
jeeva's avidyA too!! because here in this state jeeva alongwith his avidyA 
get entry into the prakruti associated form of brahma ( i.e. saguNa 
brahma) and hence this saguNa brahman is tainted with jeeva's avidyA too. 
So the new terminology of the saguNa brahman (or prakruti associated form 
of brahman)during praLaya & sushupti is 'mAyAshabAlita, avidyAtmaka 
brahma'!! 

> Anyway, there is no need to mention that there is no bhAshya support for 
this type of mergence during sushupti.  OTOH, shruti clarifies that 
jeeva's svarUpa in sushupti is brahma, coz. here he is adviteeya (eka 
mevAdviteeya) and ashareeri (ashareeraM vAva santaM na priyApriye 
sprushtaH clarifies chAndOgya, atra deva adeva further clarifies that 
sushupti brahma is not prakruti associated brahma :-)) 


It would be beneficial to note that Bhagavatpada Shankara has said this in 
the Mandukya Upanishad (mantra 2) bhashya:

>  As far as my knowledge goes shankara does not anywhere says jeeva's 
merging in sushupti is with prakruti associated brahma.  On the other 
hand, shankara and shruti insists that jeeva's resolve in sushupti is with 
adviteeya brahma, tadvA astyaitadacchindA apahatapApmA abhayaM rUpaM..This 
abhaya rUpaM cannot be mAya shabhAlita brahma at any stretch of 
imagination...

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
