+++
title = "81 bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com"
date = "2007-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019129.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019129.html)

praNAms
Hare Krishna

Though before jayAdi hOma we say yEtat karma samruddhyartham sruvEti
AjyamAtrENa jayAdi hOmaM karishyE and *karma samruddhi* is equally
important to all hOma katru-s irrespective of their vEda shAkha, jayAdi
hOma will not be observed in R^ig vEda saMpradAya.  Even in the printed
versions of agnimukha prayOga as per yajurvEda & R^ig vEda, we dont find
*jayAdi* hOma maNtra-s in R^ig vEda agnimukha.  I think it is because, all
the *viniyOga maNtra-s* in jayAdi hOma is from Krishna yajurvEda taitirIya
shAkha.  (sofar I've not seen jayAdi hOma maNtra-s in R^ig vEda svarA-s)
So, naturally, people who belong to other vEda-s (like R^igvEda & sAmavEda)
cannot recite these maNtra-s since it is not their *vEda shAkha mantra-s*.
Normally in yajurvEda, we follow, ApasthaMbha, hiraNyakEshIya, bOdhAyana,
bhAradvAjIya, vaidyanAthIya methods & in all we do perform jayAdi
hOma...But when we do the agnimukha prayOga through *chatushpAtra* vidhAna
(like we do in *upAkarma*) we dont do jayAdi hOma & there is no *idhma* &
brahma in this type of agnimukha prayOga...Though I belong to yajurvEda
shAkha, I have attended somany hOmam-s as a R^itvik wherein agnimukha is
observed  as per R^igvEdIya  AshvalAyana and sAmavEdIya drAhyAyaNa
prayOga...And in both these cases, sofar I've not seen jayAdi hOma.

I dont know if there is any *shAstrA/sUtrAdhAra* for this.  But I am sure
that, here in my place (Bangalore & surrounding areas) traditionally jayAdi
hOma  has not been observed in R^igvEda.  Interestingly,  even though main
*AchArya* knows both yajur & R^ig vEda-s...jayAdi hOma will not be
observed, if the agnimukha is done as per R^igvEda.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar



