+++
title = "21 Ms. Aikya Param"
date = "1996-11-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005432.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005432.html)

Swaagatam and namaskaaram Gummuluru Murthy!

>From my studies I appreciate that Adi Shankara and Ramana Maharshi
had the same vision and different earthly roles to play due to praarabdhah.
Similarly we each have a different mission.

Swamis were supposed to wander, are traditionally supposed to wander, so
Adishankara was being a traditional sannyaasin.  He had support of traditional
householders so the maTHs or learning centers could be established.
Somebody ought to give plenty of credit to those householders and those who
have followed who have supported those centers so I'm doing it here.

Aadishankara and Ramana Maharshi may have different writing styles too
because of different eras and different audiences, different doubts being
expressed by disciples and visitors.  The vision is the same.  We are blessed
to know both.

This term "Advaitic" experience misleads which I trust was not your intention.
Experience is not the ticket here. It is Gyaanam of the Self of all and the
identity of my little self, your little self to that.

Experience sometimes doesn't tell us the truth-such as the experience
of sunrise and sunset. Oh my, a physicist more than anyone should
be an expert resource for examples of experience telling other than truth.

Also, one can have experience and not know what has been experienced.
People  have experience of nirvikalpa samaadhi regularly and have no idea
what it is so it doesn't bless them; in fact, it may frighten them.  People may
experience  themselves as one with everything, but without BrahmaatmaGYaanam,
this is a terrifying experience because the little ego disappears.  Without
 knowledge
that experience could land you in the local mental hospital.  With knowledge it
becomes a blissful experience.

Aikya

----------

