+++
title = "19 Amuthan Arunkumar R"
date = "2005-11-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-November/015225.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-November/015225.html)

namo nArAyaNAya!

dear list members,

as agreed earlier, we can start discussing gItA for
this pArthiva saMvatsaram. i plan to start [and
hopefully complete :-)] a series of posts on shrImad
bhagavad gItA in the forthcoming months. in this mail,
i'll quickly mention some general features of these
posts. first of all, i'm still in the learning stage
and i request the learned members to correct me
whenever i go wrong in interpreting the gItA. i'll be
basing the interpretation mainly on the gItA bhAshya
(G.B.) of bhagavatpAda (BP) and the gUDhArtha dIpikA
(G.D.) of madhusUdana sarasvatI (MS), besides a series
of upanyAsam-s on gItA by a contemporary mahAn, shrI
kR^iShNa premi maharAj. i also plan to contrast this
with rAmAnuja's gItA bhAshya (R.G.B.) wherever
appropriate. the general scheme which i propose for
the future posts in this thread is this: first, a
summary of the topic/verse discussed will be given
based on G.B. and G.D. then, particular features or
niceties of G.B. and G.D. will be discussed. third,
similarities and differences between S.B. and R.G.B.
will be discussed for specific, but not all shloka-s.
i don't plan to write down the entire S.B. or G.D.
since that is well accomplished by the existing
translations. i'm not sure if all the shloka-s have to
be discussed. for instance, the entire first adhyAya
can be skipped since BP has not written any commentary
on that. but i'll try my best to discuss as many
sholka-s as possible, in the order they appear.  all
posts in this thread will be prefixed by the signature
GITA in the subject to distinguish it from other
mails. 

i'll start posting on the gItA from tomorrow.

vasudevaH sarvaM,
aparyaptAmR^itaH. 


Amuthan Arunkumar R,
Final year, B.Tech/M.Tech Dual Degree,
Dept. of Aerospace Engg., IIT Madras.



__________________________________________________________ 
Enjoy this Diwali with Y! India Click here http://in.promos.yahoo.com/fabmall/index.html

