+++
title = "52 hknarayan"
date = "2019-10-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053386.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2019-October/053386.html)

Sometime back I read the meaning of MANTRAPUSHPAM. It was excellent. I don't know where i read it here. Can anyone of you direct me to that explanation?Thanks in advanceNarayanSent from my Samsung Galaxy smartphone.
-------- Original message --------From: V Subrahmanian via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> Date: 13/10/2019  8:37 pm  (GMT-08:00) To: Advaitin <advaitin at yahoogroups.com>, A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> Cc: V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com> Subject: [Advaita-l] Fwd: {भारतीयविद्वत्परिषत्} Fwd: Dvaita-Advaita Vakyartha sadas. 13 Oct.2019, Bengaluru ---------- Forwarded message ---------From: V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>Date: Fri, Oct 11, 2019 at 11:01 PMSubject: Re: {भारतीयविद्वत्परिषत्} Fwd: Dvaita-Advaita Vakyartha sadas. 13Oct.2019, BengaluruTo: BHARATIYA VIDVAT <bvparishat at googlegroups.com>On Fri, Oct 11, 2019 at 10:54 PM Damodara Dasa <damodara.bvks at gmail.com>wrote:> Hare Krishna.>> Thankyou for information. Will we be able to watch its recording later?> Will it be recorded?>I have no idea about the recording. If they record I can request them toupload the video and provide link.regards>>> On Friday, October 11, 2019, V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>> wrote:>>> It is the 'shaastrayonitvaadhikaraNam' and not as stated earlier.>>>> regards>>>> On Fri, Oct 11, 2019 at 4:33 PM V Subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>>> wrote:>>>>>>>> There will be a Dvaita-Advaita Vakyartha sadas on Sunday, 13th Oct,>>> 2019, on the topic of 'JanmaadyadhikaraNam'. Mm Sri Krishnamurthy>>> Sastrigal and Sri Mani Dravid Sastrigal will be participating. The>>> location: Shakambari Nagar Raghavendra Mutt, close to the Banashankari Amma>>> Temple, Metro station. The Sadas will be starting about 9 AM.>>>>>> regards>>> subrahmanian.v>>>>>>>_______________________________________________Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaitaTo unsubscribe or change your options:https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-lFor assistance, contact:listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
