+++
title = "390 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-10-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047410.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-October/047410.html)

Dear Friends, I would like to give details of another indian master, Disciple of baba lahiri mahasaya, disciple of Himalayan guru Maha avatar babaji.Sri Yukteswar wasborn to a wealthy business man and his wife on May 10, 1855, in Serampore, India. He was given the name Priya Nath Karar.He was marriedand had a daughter. He was a disciple of Lahiri Mahasaya. Priya Nath Kararbecame a Swami and received the name Sri Yukteswar Giri. He met Babaji, theguru of Lahiri Mahasaya, in 1894. Babaji told him that one day he wouldsend Sri Yukteswar a disciple who would share the teachings of yoga in theWest. This disciple turned out to be Paramhansa Yogananda, who is best knownfor his book, Autobiography of a Yogi.Babaji also asked Sri Yukteswar to write a book on the essential unity of theBible and Bhagavad Gita, the most well-known scripture in India. Sri Yukteswar titled this book The HolyScience.Sri Yukteswarfounded two hermitages, one of which was his family home given to him by hisfather as his inheritance. In the last year of his life, Sri Yukteswar turnedover all his properties to Paramhansa Yogananda, asking him to find someone tomaintain them.Sri Swami Yukteswar left his physical body on March 9,1936.According to him “is the Spirit of God thatactively sustains every form and force in the universe. The Lord has createdall men from the limitless joy of His being”.
KameswaraDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
