+++
title = "168 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014413.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014413.html)

Namaste.

yasya mAyAvinashceShTAH lIlA yAshca tathAdbhutAH .
tamayaM manyate loko hyasaMgamapi saMginaM .. 86 ..

iti shrIshuka-vAkyaM ca viduShAM anubhUtidaM .
shrotAraM pRRicchhakaM kRRitvA pratyuttiM ca yathocitaM ..
87 ..

His magical deeds and miraculous achievements make people
think He has great attachment. But He is unattached.  – So
says Shri Shuka, in the context of who is asking and who is
listening.
_______________________________________________________________________________

loka-saMgrahaNArthaM ca shAstraM vakti yathA tathA .
shoka-moha-karI mAyA yathA naShTA bhavedapi .. 88 ..

For the benefit of the worldly the shAstras say, mAyA is
the promoter of sorrow and delusion, it has to be
discarded.
_________________________________________________________________________________

rAmo mahAtmA vilapan bodhyate lakShmaNAdibhiH .
kimAtmAnaM mahAtmAnaM AtmAnaM nAvabudhyase .. 89 ..

The great soul Rama (himself)   is reminded by Lakshmana
and others: How is it You don’t recognise yourself as the
Atman, the great?
_____________________________________________________________________________

ityadhyAtma-saduktInAM sambhavastatra tatra ca .
samo.ahaM sarva-bhUteShu iti gItAnusArataH .. 90 ..

Such Vedantic passages and events are everywhere. All
confirm the Gita statement: ‘I am equanimous with respect
to all beings’.
________________________________________________________________________________

pArthasya moho naShTashca tasyaivoktyeti dRRishyate .
nirasya dehabhAvaM ca sve mahimni ca kurvataH .. 91 ..

Arjuna’s delusion was also overcome, by his own admission.
Shedding off the I-am-the-body attitude, he was able to act
in the glory of the Self.
________________________________________________________________________________

sadAnanda-sphUrtirevAmRRita-kalasha-vidyayA .
prAcyAM cAbhAsamAnasya khervRRikShAgradarshane .. 92 ..

The lighting up of Bliss through the Learning from the
Ocean of Immortality is like the Sun lighting up through 
the top of the   tree in the sky.
______________________________________________________________________________

sUryAstitvaM ca tanmadhye yathA nishcIyate budhaiH .
grAhyashca buddhiyogena yatra yatrApyupAdhayaH .. 93 ..

Just as the Sun is inferred through the foliage one should,
through the exercise of the intellect, infer the Self
through the foliage of adjuncts wherever they are.
__________________________________________________________________________

tathA ca cidghanAkAshaH madhye madhye ca dRRishyayoH .
mAdhuryAdirasAssarve gRRihyante jihvayA yathA .. 94 ..

Among whatever is seen, now and then we realise the
presence of the Fullness of Consciousness – just as, the
tongue now and then tastes the sweetness of all that is
sweet. 
_____________________________________________________________________________

tathA manAmsi pakvAni gRRihNantyeva rasAmRRitaM .
manasA vedyate vedyaM vedyaM manasi tiShTati .. 95 ..

That is how the mind registers and absorbs all that is of
the essence. It is by mind that one should know what is to
be known. And then that gets imprinted in the mind.
___________________________________________________________________________
yanmanovedyahInaM ca gRRihNAtyeva navaM navaM .
vedyAnAm gRRihaNaM naivaM kuryAccetAha shAsanaM .. 96 ..

The mind keeps on absorbing newer and newer things that
need not be known. But what is to be known is not to be
absorbed this way.
_______________________________________________________________________________
yogAmRRitarasenaiva pUrayettanmanaH sthalaM .
etadarthaM ca manasaH bahiShkAryAshca vAsanAH .. 97 .. 

That space in the mind should be filled with the immortal
essence obtained by yoga. For this purpose all external
vAsanAs are to be discarded.
____________________________________________________________________________


nandi pRRiShTe sthitvA hara oM iti li~NgadarshanakAle
asmalli~Ngayormadhye.apyasmadaMshaH 
astyeva iti bhAvayet . j~nAnAnandaghanA vayaM
j~nAna-rashmidvAraiva dUrasthali~NgAdi pashyAmaH. 
Etanmadhyasthalamapi asmadrashmi-vyAptaM ityeva bhAvyaH .
evaM ca manasaH vAsanAtmakavedyajAtaM recayitvA
gItAmRRitena pUrayet ..

Synopsis: In Shiva temples we usually stand behind the
Nandi and see the shiva-lingam in the distant garbhagrham
(sanctum sanctorum) through the horns of the bull. ‘Hara
oM’ is the mantra. Full of the Consciousness that we are,
we should accept that between the horns of the bull there
is only the pervasion of the same Consciousness and the
same Light lights up the distant shiva-lingam also. It is
this kind of thought that should permeate us always, so
that we should exhale (‘rechaka’) the thoughts that are
raised by our vAsanAs and fill the mind with the the nectar
of thoughts that are generated by the Gita.
___________________________________________________________

PraNAms to all the advaitins on the list and to my father.
profvk


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
New on my  website, particularly for beginners in Hindu philosophy:

Hinduism for the next generation: http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach10.html

Free will and Divine will - a dialogue:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/FWDW.html

