+++
title = "90 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2005-03-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014294.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2005-March/014294.html)

Namaste

Note: For an Introduction, see
http://www.escribe.com/religion/advaita/m16169.html
atha pa~nchamAshvAsaH 
Now begins the fifth chapter.

yogAtmikA tu yA vidyA shAstrato dhii prachodanaM  .
kRRiShNa-yogeshvareNoktaM yogashAstramitiiritaM .. 1..

The YogAtmikA Learning that arises from the scriptures and
prompts our intellects and that  was taught by the great
yogeshvara Lord Krishna is known as the yogashAstra (of the
Gita).    
_________________________________________________

apratyaxe shrutaM sAxAt sa~njayena mahAtmanA .
pratyakparacito-raikyayoga eva vivaxitaH .. 2..

It was heard indirectly by no less a person than the great
Sanjaya. It is known as the yoga of identity between the
Immanent Absolute and the spark of consciousness inside.  
___________________________________________________________

shraddhA bhaktii tanmanastvaM shreShTa-yogasya laxaNaM .
shraddhA-bhakti-dhyAna-yogAt iti shrutyanuvAditaH .. 3 ..

Shraddha (Faith), Devotion-cum dedication  (Bhakti) and
Oneness in mind with the Absolute  constitute the
definition of the highest Yoga. The scriptures testify
“...By means of the yoga of shraddhA, bhakti and dhyAna”. 
______________________________________________________


sAdhana-trayarUpeNa upeyaM sAdhya-muchyate .
upAyopeya-bhUtAtma niShTAdvaya-miheritaH .. 4 ..

By means of the three kinds (shraddhA, bhakti and dhyAna)
of SadhanAs, the goal is said to be reachable. The
interlocking of the goal and the means has been declared to
be constituted of two processes.  
__________________________________________________________________

tatropeyaM sA~Nkhyamiti upAyo yoga iShyate .
samyak khyAtaM yatra tattvaM tat sA~NkhyaM iti gamyate .. 5
..

The goal is called “sAnkhyaM” and the means is called
“yogaM”. That theory which is expounded to perfection is
known as “sAnkhyaM”. 
_______________________________________________________________

buddhiyogo rAjayogaH dhiireNaiveSha sAdhyate .
yogaM vinA cha yat karma nikRRiShTatama-muchyate .. 6 ..

Only the brave ones achieve ‘buddhiyoga’ and ‘rajayoga’.
Action done without yoga is at the bottom of the scale. 
________________________________________________________________

yogaM sA~NkhyaM chaikamiti brahmAtmaikatva-darshanaM .
shrutyA virudhyamAnaM yat na grAhyamiti tad-vidaH .. 7 ..

The vision of identity of  brahman and Atman is to see
yogaM and sAnkhyaM as one. Those who know recommend the
rejection of what is contrary to scriptures. 
____________________________________________________

nirguNaH puruShaH pUrNaH sA~Nkhyairabhyupagamyate .
pravrajyAdupadeshena yogabhAgo.api saMmataH .. 8 ..

The Fullness that is the Absolute Attributeless is obtained
by sAnkhyaM . And it is equally in the reach of yoga by the
teaching of renunciation. 
_______________________________________________________


Atmaikya-j~nAna-pratipAdaka-taittiriiya-samhitA-chaturtha-kANDArambhe
samAdhi-prArthanAyAM vareNya-sarvAtma-jyotiShyeva yunjAnaH
prathamaM tattvAya ityArabhyate .  j~nAnAgni-kANDa-mevaitat
. agniriti abhito gamyamAnaM vastu ekaM j~nAnAkhyaM .
tadeva tattvaM . tatpada-tvaM-padayo-raikya-meva buddhau
samyag-AdhIyate iti samAdhi-ruchyate . agna AyAhi vItaye
RRita.N satyaM . bRRihaspate savitur-bodhayainaM . kasmai
devAya iti aShTau mantrAH . viShNoH kramosi . apAM tve
manthAdayAmi . rashmirasi xayAya . namaste rudra .
ashmannUrjaM . agnA viShNU . chaturtha-pa~nchamakANDayoreva
prashna-saptaka iti taddhetuH vichAraNIyaH .
puruSha-vaibhavaM vishva-rUpatayAvasthAnamiti rahasyaM ..

Synopsis:  The knowledge of Oneness with the Atman is
taught everywhere in the shruti. Several quotes justify
this.
_________________________________________________________
	(To be Continued) 

PraNAms to all advaitins on the list and to my father.
profvk





Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

You are welcome to have a look at any of the following  books on my website:
http://www.geocities.com/profvk

1. Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision & Practice
2. Live Happily, the Gita Way
3. Advaita Dialogue for beginners.
4. Discourses of the Paramacharya on Soundaryalahari.

