+++
title = "24 Vidyasankar Sundaresan"
date = "2007-02-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-February/018259.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-February/018259.html)


>Dear members
>I think that what is called unsteady GYana is actually GYana accomplished
>yet doubt lingering in that individual as to whether that is the GYana

Actually, there is no need to speculate on what is unsteady jnAna and what 
is steady jnAna. All one has to do is to read Sankara and vidyAraNya 
carefully and understand what they mean. They have each described everything 
in great detail.

>sought after.For this he has to verify it with the help of
>Shruthi/Smrithi/Acharya.Darkness gradually disappearing giving way to light
>etc,in my opinion is not   very appropriate to explain the situation as
>night falling/daybreaking are due to rotation of earth. If some one is in a
>dark room and suddenly electricity is switched on there is immediate
>light.The adjustment to that situation may perhaps be called unsteady 
>GYana.

If the light comes on instantaneously, and one is adequately prepared for 
the jump from dark to light, the period of adjustment will be negligible. 
This is not unsteady jnAna; rather it is analogous to what is called 
sadyomukti.

However, one may not be adequately prepared for the change or the voltage 
may fluctuate or there may be a temporary power outage or the bulb may die 
out - these are some of the analogies for unsteady jnAna. Of course, these 
are merely metaphors, made to illustrate one or two points. They should not 
be stretched to logical extremes, for there will be many other points where 
the metaphors may not be appropriate.

Regards,
Vidyasankar

_________________________________________________________________
With tax season right around the corner, make sure to follow these few 
simple tips. 
http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com/Taxes/PreparationTips/PreparationTips.aspx?icid=HMFebtagline


