+++
title = "40 v.subrahmanian"
date = "2021-03-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-March/056310.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-March/056310.html)

See image here:  https://groups.google.com/g/advaitin/c/SM5ypmscxzo

---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: v.subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
Date: Tuesday, March 9, 2021 at 12:01:01 PM UTC+5:30
Subject: Fwd: Talk by MM Sri Mani Dravid Sastrigal on Sri Appayya 
Dikshita's work
To: advaitin at googlegroups.com <advaitin at googlegroups.com>




---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: V Subrahmanian <v.subra... at gmail.com>
Date: Tue, Mar 9, 2021 at 12:00 PM
Subject: Talk by MM Sri Mani Dravid Sastrigal on Sri Appayya Dikshita's work
To: BHARATIYA VIDVAT <bvpar... at googlegroups.com>


https://www.facebook.com/gokula.krishna.75/posts/4225387457471297

Sharing the contents of the above post of Dr.Gokulakrishnan Iyer, 
Srirangam, here:

The talk will be in Tamil.



This is going to be a wonderful talk on 13 March, 2021 on one of the Magna 
Opera of Srimad Appayya Dikshitendra by Mahamahopadhyaya Brahmasri Mani 
Dravida Sastrigal.
"Chaturmata-saara-sangraha" also known as "Chaturmata-lesha-sangraha" is an 
independent commentary of Dikshitendra on the Brahmasutras. Divided into 
four sections named as Paricchedas, the first section of it, 
Nyayamuktavali, deals with Dvaita Vedanta of Madhvacharya, the second 
Nayamayukhamalika with Vishishtadvaita Vedanta of Ramanujacharya, the third 
book Nayamanimala deals with Sivadvaita of Srikanthacharya, and the fourth 
book Nayamanjari deals with Advaita Vedanta of Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada. He 
has written each book in the way a faithful scholar of the respective 
Sampradaya would write. He never reveals his heart while expounding each 
school's philosophy very beautifully. This book could be described as a 
Magnum Opus in the field of Vedanta which is a combination of four Magna 
Opera.
It is not an exaggeration to say that Dikshitendra has written not one but 
3 Magna Opera in the field of Advaita Vedanta, 1 Magnum Opus in Sivadvaita 
Vedanta, 3 Magna Opera in Purva Mimamsa, 1 Magnum Opus in Vyakaranam and 2 
Magna Opera in Alankara-shastra. He was such a colossal intellectual.
Here is the unique beauty of the fourth Pariccheda of 
Chaturmatasara-sangraha. It contains more than 380 shlokas. Each 
adhikaranam of the Brahmasutras is represented by at least two shlokas. The 
first shloka puts forth the Purvapaksha and the second one puts forth the 
Siddhanta. The beauty doesn't end with this. He has used more than 180 
vrttams or meters to compose the shlokas. Many vrttams are rare to find 
even in standard works of Chandas-shaastram. He was an expert in 
integrating the Shastra into Samskrta-sahityam seamlessly and 
Samskrta-sahityam into the Sastra seamlessly.
We are all blessed to hear about this great work from Sri Mani Dravida 
Sastrigal who is a doyen in the field of Advaita Vedanta today. We should 
all thank the Tattvaloka team and the Sringeri Gurubandhava team for 
organizing this lecture.


