+++
title = "53 Giri"
date = "1996-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004917.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/004917.html)

Namaste.

        Since the advaita list uses a fair number of sanskrit terms, and
some of the readers may be unaware of the sanskrit resources on the net, I
refer you to the following ongoing attempts. I do hope that this
information is not off the charter of discussion for the advaita list.

Sanskrit words commonly used in yoga can be found at
         http://www.spiritweb.org/Spirit/Yoga/yoga-sanskrit-terms.html
These words have been converted into ITRANS format and uploaded on to the
online dictionary (ITRANS is a commonly used format to transmit Sanskrit
words, with the advantage that the transliterated text can be printed out in
devangari script using specific software).
        The online dictionary and numerous other sanskrit documents are
available at the jaguar site,
ftp://jaguar.cs.utah.edu/private/sanskrit/sanskrit.html
        The words you search for using the dictionary should be typed in
ITRANS format. sutra wouldn't work, suutra would. darpana will not work,
darpaNa will etc. The dictionary is only in preliminary stages and you
can add as many words as you can and please do so.
        Currently the indology people are also working on converting the
complete and extensive Monier-williams dictionary to the online format,
but the dictionary may be restricted to certain end-users.
        We have word-by-word meanings for stotras like bhaja govindaM,
dakshiNamuurthi stotra, shiva mahimna stotra etc. and we will pull these
words into the dictionary. Please let me know if you are interested in
giving word meanings to various stotras available on the jaguar site
mentioned above.
        Right now, the best bet is probably to buy a concise/student
sanskrit to english or english to sanskrit dictionary by Apte which costs
less than $10 at the south asia bookstore
(http://www.indolink.com/Global/saBooks.html) or $15 or so at conventional
bookstores. The unabridged versions of the dictionaries by Apte or
Monier-williams (these are over 1300 pages) are around $30 at the south
asia bookstore and $50 or so elsewhere. If you are interested in
Tibetan-Sanskrit-English dictionaries, please let me know :-)
        If you are interested in learning sanskrit, please refer to the
numerous courses and books available at
        http://www.geocities.com/RodeoDrive/1415/sbooks.html

Many people are unaware that Rig veda, brahmasuutra, some major
upanishads, major dharma shastras, some minor upanishads, Ramayana,
Mahabharata, and of course, various copies of the bhagvad-gita and
numerous stotras by Adi Shankara are available at the jaguar site.

dhanyavaad.h

Giri

PS : If you feel the above information is valuable and needs to be posted
in some newsgroups, or sent to your friends, etc please do so. I hold no
copyright to the above statements :-)

