+++
title = "53 Rajesh Sarin"
date = "2002-10-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003924.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-October/003924.html)

Personally, I too have a few apprehensions about the
theory of finding a bridge through Photographs !

1     How can one exactly date the exact age of the rock
      by simply a photograph ?
      As far as I know, carbon dating and chemical analysis
      of the material from rocks is needed to determine
      the age of rocks !

2     Has anybody reached the rock physically to determine
      the age of rock ?

3     If it is only Clouds seen as a bridge in the Astronaut's
      photos, how can one be so sure about these being
      'Shoals' and 'age of 1750000 years' !

regards - Sarin Rajesh

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> --- Bobby Aiden <BobbyAiden at hotmail.com> wrote:
> > This is to reply to Sonal's Mail, here is the exact
> > version of this story on
> > NASA website and the picutre is attached herewith.
> >
> > STS-75 EARTH VIEW (SRI LANKA) --- This 70mm frame is
> > of an area seldom
> > photographed by Space Shuttle astronauts. The view
> > is northwestward across
> > the "teardrop" of Sri Lanka, along Adam's Bridge (a
> > sandbar that nearly
> > closes the Palk Strait), and southern India. Strong
> > westerly winds show the
> > effects of evapotranspiration; there is enough
> > moisture generated by
> > vegetation on Sri Lanka to form streets of cumulus
> > clouds relatively near
> > the eastern shoreline. In contrast the dry plains of
> > southern India provide
> > little cloud-forming moisture, even over the
> > Southern Ghats (the range of
> > hills along the western edge of the Indian
> > Peninsula. A few plumes of smoke,
> > probably from seasonal agricultural burning, can be
> > seen north and south of
> > China Bay (Trincomalee) on the east coast of Sri
> > Lanka.
> >
> >





S Jayanarayanan <sjayana at YAHOO.COM>@LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG> on
11-10-2002 23:45:29

Please respond to List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
       <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>

Sent by:    List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
       <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>


The website

http://www.indolink.com/Religion/r091702-130924.php

has some photographs (courtesy of NASA), revealing a
man-made bridge under the ocean between India and
Srilanka. The photos are for real, as links to the
official NASA images site bring up the same pictures,
e.g.
http://images.jsc.nasa.gov/iams/images/earth/STS033/lowres/20003372.jpg

Article:
-------------------------
Space images taken by NASA reveal a mysterious ancient
bridge in the Palk Strait between India and Sri Lanka.
The recently discovered bridge currently named as
Adam´s Bridge is made of chain of shoals, c.18 mi (30
km) long.

The bridge´s unique curvature and composition by age
reveals that it is man made. The legends as well as
Archeological studies reveal that the first signs of
human inhabitants in Sri Lanka date back to the a
primitive age, about 1,750,000 years ago and the
bridge´s age is also almost equivalent.

This information is a crucial aspect for an insight
into the mysterious legend called Ramayana, which was
supposed to have taken place in tredha yuga (more than
1,700,000 years ago).

In this epic, there is a mentioning about a bridge,
which was built between Rameshwaram (India) and
Srilankan coast under the supervision of a dynamic and
invincible figure called Rama who is supposed to be
the incarnation of the supreme.

This information may not be of much importance to the
archeologists who are interested in exploring the
origins of man, but it is sure to open the spiritual
gates of the people of the world to have come to know
an ancient history linked to the Indian mythology.
------------------------

Regards,

Kartik

__________________________________________________
Do you Yahoo!?
Faith Hill - Exclusive Performances, Videos & More
http://faith.yahoo.com



