+++
title = "266 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2017-02-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-February/044547.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-February/044547.html)

Then you say there are two categories.Vedabahyas, sinners mentioned in the
sloka.
I agree that sloka can be interpreted so. (But that is not the way this
discussion started. It was assumed that Vedabahyas are the papis.)
So vedabahyas do not belong to papi category. Who are these papis. Since
they are separately mentioned from vedabahyas they must belong to the
vaidika category. Remember we can divide people only as vaidikas and
vedabahyas.
So tantras are created to delude papi vaidikas. Tantras are created to
protect vedabahyas and not to delude them.

regards,
Sarma.

On Fri, Feb 17, 2017 at 8:41 PM, श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:

>
>
>
> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>
> On Fri, Feb 17, 2017 at 8:21 PM, D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ <
> dvnsarma at gmail.com> wrote:
>
>> I have read this and could not get  at its meaning.
>>
>> There are two types of people : vedAdhikArI and others.
>> Now, if the quoted purANa says that they are for delusion of some
>> (
>> to take them to a-vaidika-mArga
>> )
>> , then it is obvious that it is talking about vedAdhikArI-s and not
>> others.
>> This tantra-nindA is only for vedAdhikArI-s, so that they don't go on
>> that path.
>>
>
> I accept that the sentences were not well formed. I'm sorry.
> Please, read the quoted text now. It may reveal it's meaning now.
>
>
>> again,
>> तस्माद्धि वेदबाह्यानां रक्षणार्थाय पापिनाम्
>>
>> विमोहनाय शास्त्राणि करिष्यामो वृषध्वज  १११
>>
>> Tantras are created for the protection and delusion of Vedabahyas.
>>
>
> (Your?) translation is wrong.
> Read it as - Tantra-s are for protection of veda-bAhya-s and for delusion
> of pApI-s.
> 
>
>> What is the delusion that tantras are supposed to be causing to the
>> Vedabahyas?
>>
>
> Wrong question based on wrong understanding which comes from wrong
> translation.
> 
>
>
>
