+++
title = "29 K. Sadananda"
date = "2001-08-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-August/001787.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2001-August/001787.html)

By mistak my response went to only adviatin and not to advaita-L. I
notice Shree Aniruddhan also responded exactly in the same way.  Here
is what I responded- Sadananda

>   >"and it is one without a second."
>>   >
>>   >Can this assertion be proved even without Sruti pramAna?
>>
>>
>>Yes - I thought I did - Here it is again - If there is a second, that
>>second has be different from the first to say it is second.
>
>Why should it be so, Sada? There can be two exactly identical things and
>there are still two different entities. I've two telephones in front of me
>right now and both are the same make, model etc Absolutely no difference
>between them. But still they are two things are they not? You can even take
>a couple of eggs and cannot see any difference between them - but that
>doesn't in anyway deny that they are two distinct entities, right?

I do not thinks so - if there are two things there is boundary
between the two - when there is only one there is no boundary - the
boundary is the form or shape - it is an attribute of the object -The
boundary also defines that something is there that separate one
object from the other.   You eliminate the boundary between the two
telephones you have or two eggs you have and then pose the question
if there are two telephones or eggs.



>   >Hence if
>>there is some thing other than existence, it has to be non-existence
>
>Why can't there be two things of existence? I who write this mail and you
>who read it both exist right? So why should one of us be non-existent for
>another to be existent?

Existence is indivisible, akhanDam.  you are looking from the
boundaries of the bodies - but not from the existence aspect.  Please
think it over.  Both are within the existence only - Hence it is
called praj~naana ghanam - Indivisible all pervading consciousness.
Fundamentally there cannot be anything other than existence - hence
it is sarvagatam - all pervading and eternal.

Hari Om!
Sadananda

--
K. Sadananda
Code 6323
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington D.C. 20375
Voice (202)767-2117
Fax:(202)767-2623
-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: </archives/advaita-l/attachments/20010807/291dabf1/attachment.html>
