+++
title = "139 K. Sadananda"
date = "1996-06-28"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/005018.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-June/005018.html)

In message  <M.062896.133847.61 at ddi.digital.net> egodust writes:
>
> Concur.  Except the refutation that there's no prarabdha to exhaust.  Perhaps
> you're alluding to the idea that the jivanmukta has consciously transcended
> all karma, including prarabdha?--which I agree with wholeheartedly--, however,
> it's my understanding that the prarabdha still relates to the mortal coil and
> its activities within the world-appearance.  As the popular metaphor suggests:
> "When the fan is switched off, the blade will spin for some time."

I tried to explain the so-called the prarabda of the mortal coil - interms of
prarabda of the matter - but not that of the jeevan mukta - otherwise mukta or
liberation has no meaning.  Secondly by statement - brahamvit brahaiva bhavati -
he has identified himself with brahman - It becomes a body prarabda to
"apparently undergo whatever it has to undergo - ex. cancer Ramakrishna had or
the Bhagavan Ramana had or being nailed to the cross as Jesus etc.- If there is
still an identification with the body - I am the body - then ignorence is still
there and realization, mukti, is not there yet.


> It's also more accurate to say--as you suggest--that Isvara efficiently
> utilizes and directs the already-developed upadhis of the jnani where and
> how He sees fit, and not the Parabrahmam [which has nothing to do with the
> relative world-projection].
>

Yes. this is logical and consistent with the concept that once realized one
never returns back to the ignorent state.

Hari Om!
Sadananda

