+++
title = "197 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2012-03-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031132.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031132.html)

Dear Venkatesha Murty

Madhavavarma II of Vishnukundinas has performed not one but eleven
Aswamedhas.

If you know telugu peruse today's Andhra Jyothi daily.

The homakundas copnstructed are still intact at Keesaragutta near Hyderabad

-- 
regards,
Sarma.

On Sat, Mar 10, 2012 at 2:05 AM, Vidyasankar Sundaresan <
svidyasankar at hotmail.com> wrote:

>
> In the mahAbhArata, duryodhana too did not perform aSvamedha? Was
> this because he respected dharma?
>
> > >
> > Sishtacara is also against Ashwamedha. No Sista wants to sacrifice and
> > other animals and do indecent acts.
> >
> > From many angles like Dharma Sastra text books, Sampradaya and
> > Sisctacara it is wrong to do Ashwamedha now.
>
> Could you please take your preaching and pronouncements about these
> topics to the proper fora, if any? This is not the place for it.
>
> You could, for example, go to the Avadhoota whose vision is said to be
> the inspiration for the yajna you cite, and give him a piece of your mind
> on dharma. Or you could go to the ritvik-s and purohita-s from Kerala
> and other places and challenge them about their schooling in their veda
> pAThaSAla-s and their AcAra. This list does not have any of those people
> here. This list is meant for a discussion of advaita vedAnta, not the
> performance of some action by someone somewhere sometime.
>
> I responded to your posting about this for two reasons. bRhadAraNyaka
> begins with an upanishadic analysis of aSvamedha and the verse in the
> brahmavaivarta purANa that prohibits aSvamedha in the kaliyuga also
> prohibits saMnyAsa in kaliyuga. That made it tangentially relevant to this
> list, in my eyes. Beyond that, this list is not the appropriate forum for
> the kind of discussion you want to have.
>
> Thank you,
> Vidyasankar
>
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

