+++
title = "153 KAMESWARARAO MULA"
date = "2017-09-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-September/046805.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-September/046805.html)

Dear Friends,           Today when I was reading somearticle in times i found this very interesting as we canelaborator and discuss with the help of some science. Some times the concept of REUNICATION is misinterpreted as giving up the good things of life to adopt a life of deprivation & misery. As we should always believe " Don't Give up" in any worst situation as the times moves & comes back, it is natures play. Renunciation is not giving up the things which we do, it is moving up to far more doing & reaching our lakshsya. In this process we may fall short to the target, but we will reach it, it is certain. How we will reach is that by doing dynamic action in spirt of renunciation with the diving help of the guru.
For a Devotees Question, once sir Ramakrishna Replied, Creation is from the joy and not for the joy.
Reunication is giving up the residue of grudges, prejudices andhatred to live life of freedom, happiness which leads to one's growth. When a caterpillar (Gongalipurugu) transforms into a butterfly (Sitakokachiluka), its darkness & Limitations vanishes. Although the genomeis different is both , but the proteome is different as it is dynamic. Some proteins are responsible for its colour and flying wings of the butterfly. If we becomes like this, we experience freedom, joy, cheers and live life effortless excellence.
The fifth chapter of Gita talks about four type of people, i.e Bhogi, Yogi, Sanyasi & Jnani.The Jnani is ariver, never bound by the world and can reach destination of the infinite bliss. As he movesup he is more successful, experience greater happiness and gains more power. He can only Operate with the body, mind and intellect when needed and can keep quiet in the infinite world when not needed as others are stuck in the world.
In the path of Spiritual Journey, you become free from agitation, sorrow and can be realised from the baggages of the past by developing quality vision towards all and remain unaffected by fluctuations in the world. As we look outwards for happiness, you remain unhappy. Once you start looking inwards you experience peace. Once you realise that our atman is brahaman we get infinite bliss.
Final message is that we should stop theface born of desire with the intellect and as we reduce the no of desires we improve the quality of the desires and change the direction. Then we are ready and prepared for meditation which leads to liberation.
Any learned members may contribute their views for 'Renunciation of Karma'Source: TIMES, Author: Jaya Row
regardsKameswara RaoDr. M.Kameswara RaoSenior Scientist, P&T Division,Defence Research & Development Establishment,Ministry of Defence, Govt of IndiaJhansi Road, Gwalior-474002,IndiaPh 91-(0)751-2390368(0)Imp Note:The information contained in this electronic message and any attachments to this message are intended for the exclusive use of the addressee(s) and may contain proprietary, confidential or privileged information. If you are not the intended recipient, you should not disseminate, distribute or copy this e-mail. Please notify the sender immediately and destroy all copies of this message and any attachments if any.
