+++
title = "181 Praveen R. Bhat"
date = "2017-09-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-September/046841.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-September/046841.html)

Namaste Bhaskarji,

As I said earlier, my mail was only for those neutral readers who might end
up taking the unfortunate content-less continuous criticism of the
traditional sub-commentators that goes on here these days as true, and not
a reply with an intention to have a discussion with those who have already
concluded as to what the right sources for study are.

And for what its worth, I don't fall for praises I am unworthy of; instead,
I'll take that as arthavAda or sarcasm which is more likely and move on.
And considering that our discussions have also ended up in bitter taste, I
prefer not to indulge myself in it again, since we have no common ground to
discuss.

Finally, to clarify, neither did I mean you when I said armchair
philosopher, nor can I ever call you so since you have studied under a
teacher. Others like me, not being an uttamottamAdhikArI to gain knowledge
directly from mUla or bhAshya alone, need sub-commentators to satisfy as to
what exactly did the prasannagambhIra Bhagavan Bhashyakara mean when He
says something, even be it to fill the Adipada at so many places. I am
happy to follow vivaraNa with a shade of Bhamati as necessary. To me,
differences in Bhamati and Vivarana will always be like one filling the
Adipada in avidyAdi with kAma and karma, while the other with asmitA, rAga,
dveSha and abhinivesha. For anything else, I couldn't care any lesser, as
to who called whom donkey, since it doesn't fit in the ShaDliMga for
tAtparyanishcaya, but in na-hi-nindA-nyAya and nor does it help me even a
bit. People who rejoice in that sort of thing are welcome to the same. My
interest is in mokSha and I'm not a fool to think that neither Bhamatikara
nor Vivaranakara were muktas and further think that somehow I will get
mukti!

​Best wishes on your pursuit any which way you desire to further.

asmadAchAryaparyantebhyaH gurupAdukebhyaH​,
--praveen
