+++
title = "14 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-07-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024907.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-July/024907.html)

Moksha is got after sanyasa only. not from Gruhastha and other stages 
directly.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

I told you I am not interested in continuing this discussion...Anyway, 
here is my final attempt :

mOkSha is NOT the sole property of sanyAsi-s, for getting mOksha sanyAsa 
as an ashrama is not a MUST, but mumukshatva is the MUST....Those who have 
nityAnitya vastu vivekAdi sAdhana chatushtaya saMpatti, irrespective of 
their varNAshrama, are eligible to get mOksha according to shankara 
siddhAnta...jnAnamAtre tadyapi sarvAshmeeNAm adhikAraH says shankara in 
mundaka shruti introduction...This jnAna can happen to non-dvijas by 
smruti, itihAsa purANa & strict adhearance to japa, upavAsa & 
devatArAdhana (see shankara's sUtra bhAshya 3rd adhyAya I believe!!) And 
in geeta bhAshya shankara clearly says for this paramArtha jnAna even 
stree, vaishya & shUdra are too eligible if they fulfill the above sAdhana 
requirement.  streeyO vaishyAstaThA shUdrAstepi yAnti parAM gatiM...If you 
see the upanishad & smruti text's characters carefully there are plenty of 
stree-s & non-dvija-s depicted as jnAni-s..non-dvija-s like vidura, 
dharmavyAdha stree-s like yOgini sulabhA, maitreyi, gArgi, devata-s like 
indra, bhrugu, gandharva-s like vishvAvasu, brahmachArins like nachikeva, 
mArkendeya, prahlAda, anAshrami-s like raikva, saMvarta, kings like janaka 
etc. 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!
bhaskar

PS :  Kindly dont expect any further mails from me on this thread. 

