+++
title = "00 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013336.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013336.html)

Namaste 

41
yat-kimcin-nAma-rUpAtmakam-idam-asad-evo-ditaM bhAti bhUmau
yenA-neka-prakArair-vyvaharati jagad-yena tene-shvareNa /
tadvat-pracchAdanIyaM nibhRta-rashanayA yadvad-eshha
dvi-jihvaH
tena tyaktena bhojyaM sukham-anatishayaM mA
grdho’nyad-dhanAdyaM //

yat kimcit:  Whatever  (is)
nAma-rUpAtmakaM  idaM : of the nature of name and form here
bhUmau : in this world
asat eva uditaM : springs up as a mere unreality
pracchAdanIyaM :  (and) should be veiled off
tena IshvareNa : by that Lord
yena jagat bhAti : by whom this universe is manifest
yena aneka-prakAraiH vyvavaharati : (and) by whom it is
multifariously active;
yadvat tadvat : just as 
eshhaH dvijihvaH : this snake (is veiled off)
nibhRta-rashanayA : by the known rope.
tena tyaktena : Only by abandoning that (unreality)
anatishayaM sukhaM bhojyaM : unsurpassed bliss is to be
enjoyed
mA gRdhaH anyat dhana-AdyaM : Do not covet anything else
like wealth, etc.

Note 1. I have translated ‘rashanA’ as ‘rope’. It is only a
guess. I don’t have dictionary support for this. Can some
one help?

Note 2. Readers would easily recognize that this shloka is
a paraphrase, -- with the Acharya’s stamp
‘nibhRta-rashanayA yadvad-eshha dvijihvaH’ --  of the first
verse of Ishopanishat. Mark how dexterously he uses the
same words ‘Isha’ (IshvareNa), ‘vAsyaM’ (pracchAdanIyaM),
‘idaM’, ‘yat kimca’, ‘jagat’, ‘tena tyaktena’ ‘bhunjIta’
(bhojyam) , ‘mA gRdhaH’ , ‘dhanaM’ !

42
jIvan-muktir-mumukshhoH prathamam-atha tathA
muktir-AtyantikI ca 
te’bhyAsa-jnAna-yogAt guru-caraNa-kRpA’pAnga-sangena
labdhAt /
abhyAso’pi dvidhA syAt adhikaraNa-vashAt daihiko
mAnasash-ca 
shArIras-tv-Asan-Adyo hy-uparatir-aparo jnAna-yogaH
puroktaH //

mumukshhoH : To the seeker of Liberation
prathamaM jIvan-muktiH : there first comes Liberation while
living
atha tathA muktiH AtyantikI ca : and thereafter, the
ultimate Liberation.
te : These two
abhyAsa-jnAna-yogAt : (are the result) of the yoga of
practice and the yoga of Realisation
labdhAt : (which themselves are) attained 
guru-caraNa-kRpA-apAnga-sangena : (guru – feet – grace –
glance – association) by contact of the Teacher’s feet and
His merciful glance.
abhyAsaH api : Practice, too
dvividhA syAt : is of two kinds
adhikaraNa-vashAt : according to qualification, (namely)
daihiko mAnasashca : of the body, and of the mind.
shArIraH tu : Bodily practice, of course
AsanAdyaH : (consists of) postures, etc.,
aparaH puroktaH jnAna-yogaH : (while) the other,
jnAna-yoga, previously mentioned,
uparatiH : (consists of) abstention.

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk














=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

