+++
title = "03 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013339.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013339.html)

Namaste.

43

sarvAn-unmUlya kAmAn hRdi kRta-nilayAn
kshhipta-shankUn-ivoccaiH 
dIryad-dehAbhimAnas-tyajati capalatAm-Atma-dattAbhimAnaH /
yAty-Urdhva-sthAnam-uccaiH kRta-sukRta-bharo 
nADikAbhir-vicitraM
nIlash-cetA-ruNAbhiH sravad-amRta-bharaM
gRhyamANAtma-soukhyaH //

unmUlya : Having rooted out
sarvAn kAmAn : all desires
hRdi kRta-nilayAN : which have taken their seats in the
heart
uccaiH kshhipta-shankUn iva : as if their pegs were
forcibly broken,
tIrNa-dehAbhimAnaH : having crossesd all attachment with
the body
Atma-dattAbhimAnaH : and having given all his attention to
the Self
tyajati : He abandons
capalatAM : waywardness.
kRta-sukRta-bharaH : Full of accumulated merit 
yAti : he reaches
UrdhvasthAnaM uccaiH : the highest abode (sahasrAra cakra)
vicitraM : that is adorned by 
nIlash-ceta-aruNAbhiH nADikAbhiH : dark, white and red
nADIs 
sravad-amRta-bharaM : full of flowing nectar
gRhyamANAtma-soukhyaH : (and thereby is) the enjoyer of the
bliss of the Self.

Note the words “uccaiH kshhipta-shankUn iva”. He tells us
how to root out the desires. They are pegged into us
without our knowing it. The pegs have to be forcibly pulled
out.

44.
prApashyad-vishvam-Atmety-ayam-iha purushhaH
shoka-mohAdy-atItaH 
shukraM brahmA-dhyagacchat-sa khalu
sakalavit-sarva-siddhAspadaM hi /
vismRtya sthUla-sUkshhma-prabhRti-vapur-asau
sarva-sankalpa-shUnyo
jIvan-muktas-turIyaM padam-adhigatavAn-puNya-pApair-vihInaH
//

ayaM purushhaH  : This person
iha : here, in this world, in  this body,
shoka-mohAdy-atItaH : passes beyond sorrow, delusion, etc.
prapashyat : saw
vishvaM AtmA iti : the universe as the Self.
saH adhyagacchat khalu: (Then) he attained, indeed,
shukraM brahma : the shining Hiranya-garbha
sakalavit : (and became) all-knowing
sarva-siddhAspadaM : repository of all occult powers.
vismRtya : (Afterwards), having forgotten
sthUla-sUkshhma-prabhRti-vapuH : all sense of the gross,
subtle and other bodies
sarva-sankalpa-shUnyaH : and devoid of all determined
volition
asau : this person,
punya-pApaiH vihInaH : purged of all punya and papa,
adhigatavAn : has attained
turIyaM padaM : the fourth state,
jIvan-muktaH : as a jIvan-mukta (one liberated even while
living).

Note: Who is speaking this verse? Ramana or Shankara? Does
this not look like a first person account of the Acharya
Himself?

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk












=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

