+++
title = "18 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013348.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013348.html)

Namaste

45
yas-satvAkAra-vRttau pratiphalati yuvA deha-mAtrAvRto’pi
taddharmair-bAlya-vArddhyAdibhir-anupahataH prANa
AvirbabhUva /
shreyAn-sAdhyas-tam-etaM sunipuNa-matayaH
satya-sankalpa-bhAjo
hy-abhyAsAd-devayantaH pariNata-manasA sAkam-UrdhvaM
nayanti //

yaH satvAkAra-vRttau : From such realisation of the Truth
pratiphalati :  (what) results (is that)
yuvA prANaH AvirbabhUva : a buoyant youthful life springs
up
deha-mAtrAvRtaH api : (which) though encased in a body (and
the senses) 
anupahataH : is unaffected 
taddharmaiH : by their natural attributes
bAlya-vArddhyAdibhiH : belonging to boyhood, old age and
the like.
shreyAn : It is full of bliss;
sAdhyaH : It can accomplish (great things).
sunipuNa-matayaH : Men of supreme wisdom
satya-sankalpa-bhAjaH : whose resolution is unfailing
devayantaH : and those who seek to become divine
abhyAsAt : by (spiritual) practice
nayanti hi : lead indeed 
tam etam : such a life
UrdhvaM : (to) the highest goal
pariNata-manasA sAkaM : along with the purified mind.

Note 1: “yaH satvAkAra-vRttau” : Recall the Acharya was
talking about jIvan-mukti in the previous shloka #44.

Note 2:  (VK’s doubt): Who is leading whom here? Supremely
wise men and unfailingly resolute spiritual people help the
jIvan-mukta’s life to go along smoothly towards its natural
end. Is this what is being said?   [I am not happy at this
conclusion! – VK]


46. 
prAyo’kAmo’stakAmo niratishaya-sukhAy-Atmakamas-tadAsau 
tat-prAptA-vApta-kAmaH sthita-carama-dashas-tasya
dehA-vasAne /
prANA nai-votkramanti krama-viratimitAH svasva-hetau
tadAnIM 
kvAyaM jIvo vilIno lavaNam-iva jale’khaNDa Atmaiva pashcAt
//

prAyaH : Mostly
tadA asau : then, this person
akAmaH :   (now) almost without desire,
astakAmaH: his desires having disaappeared,
AtmakAmaH : longs only for the Self
niratishaya-sukhAya : for the sake of its unsurpassed
bliss.
tat-prAptau : When That is obtained
Apta-kAmaH : all his desires have been attained
Sthita-carama-dashaH : and he remains in that final
condition.
deha-avasAne : When the body dies,
prANAH : the life-forces
na eva utkramanti : do not rise therefrom (for any future
birth)
krama-viratimitAH : but gradually dissolve themselves 
sva-sva-hetau : in their respective sources 
tadAnIM : And then,
kva ayaM jIvaH : where is this individual soul
vilInaH : having been dissolved
lavaNam iva jale : like salt in water?
pashcAt : Thereafter, 
akhaNDa Atma eva : it is nothing but the Infinite Self
itself!

Note: These two shlokas (#s45 and 46) are relevant in the
context of standard questions like “What happens to a
jIvan-mukta in his life as a jIvan-mukta?”.  

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk






=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

