+++
title = "88 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2004-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013417.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-August/013417.html)

Namaste.

53
Yadvat-pIyUshha-rashmau dinakara-kiraNair-bimbitair-eti
sAndraM 
nAsham naishaM tamisraM gRha-gatam-athavA mUrcchitaiH
kAnsya-pAtre /
tadvad-buddhau parAtma-dyutibhir-anupadaM
bimbitAbhis-samantAt 
bhAsante hIndriyAsya prasRtibhir-anishaM rUpa-mukhyAH
padArthAH //

yadvat : Just as 
dinakara-kiraNaiH bimbitaiH : by the rays of the Sun,
reflected
pIyUshha-rashmau : in the traces of Soma , that is, in the
Moon
sAndraM nAishaM tamisraM  : the utter darkness of the night
nAshaM eti : is removed
athavA gRha-gatam (tamisraM) : or the darkness of the
interior of the house
mUrcchitaiH kAnsya-pAtre :  by the rays (of the Sun)
focussed by a metallic reflector
tadvat : so also
parAtma-dyutibhiH : by the rays of the Supreme Self
buddhau bimbitAbhiH : reflected in the intellect
anupadaM  bhAsante : immediately are revealed,
hi : indeed, 
indriya-Asya-prabhRtibhiH : through the outlets  of the
senses,
rupa-mukhyAH padArthAH : all objects of perception, such as
forms etc.


54
pUrN-AtmA-nAtma-bhedAt trividham-iha paraM
buddhy-avacchinnam-anyat 
tatraiv-AbhAsa-mAtraM gaganam-iva jale tri-prakAraM vibhAti
/
ambho-vacchinnam-asmin prati-phalitam-ataH
pAthaso’ntar-bahishca
pUrNA-vacchinna-yoge vrajati layam-avidyA svakAryaiH
sahaiva //

(This Supreme Self – i.e., this parAtmA, -- of the previous
shloka) 
trividhaM : has three aspects
pUrNa-AtmA-anAtma-bhedAt : according to (its being) the
Full, the Self and the non-self;
iha : inasmuch as, they are
paraM : the unconditioned  Self,
anyat buddhy-avacchinnaM :  and next, that which is
conditioned by the intellect
tatra eva AbhAsa-mAtraM : and finally, that which is only a
reflection; 
iva : just as 
gaganaM :  space 
tri-prakAraM vibhAti : manifests in three ways, namely 
ambho-vacchinnaM : that which is occupied  by water (in a
vessel)
asmin jale prati-phalitaM : that which is reflected in 
that water, 
ataH : and further,
pAthasaH antar-bahish-ca : the space which is inside and
outside (the vessel).
pUrNa-avacchinna-yoge : When the conditioned Self merges in
the unconditioned,
avidyA : the Ignorance 
layaM vrajati : disappears
svakAryaiH saha eva : along with all its effects.


Note 1. See the three facets of The Self in 
 http://www.geocities.com/profvk/TheSelf.html.
Therein  along with these three,  the ‘outer’ self, which
is the body-mind-intellect, is also shown. The jIva which
is the reflection of the Ultimate in the intellect, is
usually mistaken as the self. When it is so mistaken it is
the non-self of this shloka. This is the space that is
reflected in water. The real self is the AtmA (the jIvAtmA)
which is the sAkshhI, corresponding to the space inside the
vessel, that is hidden or covered by water. And then there
is the pUrNAtmA which is the space everywhere including the
inside of the vessel.

PraNAms to all students of Adi Shankaracharya.
profvk




=====
Prof. V. Krishnamurthy
My website on Science and Spirituality is http://www.geocities.com/profvk/
You can  access my book on Gems from the Ocean of Hindu Thought Vision and Practice,  and my father R. Visvanatha Sastri's manuscripts from the site.
Also see my webpages on Live Happily, the Gita Way at http://www.geocities.com/profvk/gohitvip/contentsbeach11.html

