+++
title = "61 Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas"
date = "2007-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019132.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019132.html)

Namaste

The fact that it does not happen with everyone is well articulated in
my mail and the answer is also given there in.

Understanding that this wrold is transient is viveka and not vairagya.
To obtain viveka vairagya helps. One would do well to read the
upadesha panchakam/sadhana panchakam of Sri Shakarabhagavadpada. Self
enquiry is a full time job. It cannot be done according to ones whims
and fancies. Upadesha panchakam will help one to objectively gauge
oneself and see where one stands. There has been a discussion on
upadesha panchakam in our list some years ago. Nevertheless, it is
good to recall.


vedo nityamadhIyataaM taduditaM karma svanuShThIyataam.h .
        teneshasya vidhIyataamapachitiH kaamye matistyajyataam.h .
paapaughaH paridhuuyataaM bhavasukhe dosho.anusandhIyataam.h .
        aatmechchhaa vyavasIyataaM nijagR^ihaattuurNaM vinirgamyataam.h .. 1..

Study the Veda every day; do properly the karma prescribed therein;
through that (act), worship the Lord; give up the thought of doing an
act with desire (for its fruit); shake off the group of sinful deeds;
consider (mentally) the defect in worldly pleasure; strive for the
desire (for the knowledge) of the Átmán (Self); get out of your home
without delay.

saN^gaH satsu vidhIyataaM bhagavato bhaktirdR^iDhaa.a.adhIyataam.h .
        shaantyaadiH parichIyataaM dR^iDhataraM karmaashu santyajyataam.h .
sadvidvaanupasR^ipyataaM pratidinaM tatpaadukaa sevyataam.h .
        brahmaikaaxaramarthyataaM shrutishirovaakyaM samaakarNyataam.h .. 2..

Form association with good; entertain firm devotion for the Lord;
practise Ùánti (calmness of mind) and so on; give up at once the
fast-binding karma (action); approach the good, wise person (for
knowledge); serve (worship) his sandal (feet) every day; seek (from
him knowledge of Brahman, symbolized by the single Syllable (Om);
listen to the Vedánta-vakya dealing with Brahman.



vaakyaarthyashcha vichaaryataaM shrutishirapakshaH samaashrIyataam.h .
        dustarkaat.h suviramyataaM shrutimatastarko.anusandhIyataam.h .
brahmaasmIti vibhaavyataamaharahargava.rH parityajyataam.h .
        dehe.ahaMmatirujhyataaM budhajanairvaadaH parityajyataam.h .. 3..


Ponder over the import of scriptural texts (Vedánta-vákyas) dealing
with Brahman. Accept the view (verdict) of the Vádanta-texts.
Deliberately desist from vain (bad) reasoning (discussion). Bear in
mind (follow) the reasoning that is in accord with the scriptures
(Veda). Always revolve in the mind the thought - ``I am Brahman''.
Always give up pride. Give up the notion, ``I am the body''. Avoid
vain discussion with the wise.


xudvyaadhishcha chikitsyataaM pratidinaM bhikshauShadhaM bhujyataam.h .
        svaadvannaM na tu yaachyataaM vidhivashaat.h praaptena santuShyataam.h .
shItoShNaadi viShahyataaM na tu vR^ithaa vaakyaM samuchchaaryataam.h .
        audaasInyamabhIpsyataaM janakR^ipaanaiShThuryamutsR^ijyataam.h .. 4 ..


Cure the disease in the form of hunger; take in the medicine in the
form of bhikúá (borrowed alms); do not ask for delicious (savoury)
food; be contented with what is acquired providentially (without
effort); endure patiently cold and heat and other (pairs of
opposites); do not utter words in vain; have desire to be neutral
(without taking sides); give up the attitude of being kind to some
people and cruel to others.


ekaante sukhamaasyataaM paratare chetaH samaadhIyataam.h .
        puurNaatmaa susamIxyataaM jagadidaM tadbaadhitaM dR^ishyataam.h .
praakkarma pravilaapyataaM chitibalaannaapyuttaraiH shliShyataam.h .
        praarabdhaM tviha bhujyataamatha parabrahmaatmanaa sthIyataam.h .. 5..

Sit comfortably in a lonely (quiet) place; fix the mind on the Higher
(Supreme) Self; seek the full (all-pervading) Átman within; consider
this Universe as sublated by it; melt away (destroy) the effect of
karma already done by dint of discriminating knowledge; get detached
from future actions; go through the effect of karma which you have
begun to experience here; finally remain (peacefully) in the exalted
state of the Supreme Self (Para-brahman).


The second verse sheds ample light again on the importance of guru.
The third verse commands us to accept the truth of vedantic texts.
Well, if only we could follow these upadeshams, vairagya, viveka and
kaivalya will be obtained.

Sadguro Saranam


On 7/31/07, srikanta at nie.ac.in <srikanta at nie.ac.in> wrote:
> With reference to Dr.Prasanna Srinivas on the role of a Guru.He has quoted
> Aurobindo's example.But it doesnot happen with every one.First it is
> necessary to understand that this world is transient(vairagya) and one
> must obtain viveka.Shankara says in his Brahmasutra Bhashya that Viveka
> and vairagya are the prime requsites for a seeker.Without this any amount
> of quoting from the scripture is of no use.It just becomes "Shuka
> jalpita"(parrot talk).Also one has to work towards the goal.The Guru can
> only pointout the way.But it is for the seeker to put effort and work
> towards it.
> Namaste.                                               N.Srikanta.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>


-- 
Thanks and regards

Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas
Mobile: +91-99002 17109
Phone:+91-80-233 69953

