+++
title = "62 Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas"
date = "2007-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019134.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-July/019134.html)

Namaste

In yaksha prasna when asked what is the greatest wonder Yudishtira responds

"Day after day countless people die. Yet the living wish to live
forever. O Lord, what can be  greater wonder?"

How profound. We see our near and dear depart. Yet we always believe
it will never happen to us. Or atleast feel comfortable thinking that
way.

Just not in this birth, we have had several births where we have
experienced the loss of our near and dear. Inspite of this, we have
not achieved viveka/vairagya.

The truth is we love ourselves so much than anything else. We have
also experienced birth and death in so many janmas. Yet, we have not
achieved viveka/vairagya.

Hence there is nothing new that we have to experience to realize the
truth. All that is required is washing of this vasanas acquired which
can happen only on surrendering to a sadguru as that is paramount.

there is no question of not doing sadhana. The very fact that one is
initiated into a sadhana also happens by His grace. The guru
constantly tests the maturity of the sishya and also gives the latter
the strength to overcome the obstacles in the path of sadhana.

Sadguro Saranam




On 7/31/07, srikanta at nie.ac.in <srikanta at nie.ac.in> wrote:
> With reference to Dr.Prasanna Srinivas on the role of a Guru.He has quoted
> Aurobindo's example.But it doesnot happen with every one.First it is
> necessary to understand that this world is transient(vairagya) and one
> must obtain viveka.Shankara says in his Brahmasutra Bhashya that Viveka
> and vairagya are the prime requsites for a seeker.Without this any amount
> of quoting from the scripture is of no use.It just becomes "Shuka
> jalpita"(parrot talk).Also one has to work towards the goal.The Guru can
> only pointout the way.But it is for the seeker to put effort and work
> towards it.
> Namaste.                                               N.Srikanta.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>


-- 
Thanks and regards

Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas
Mobile: +91-99002 17109
Phone:+91-80-233 69953

