+++
title = "77 kalyan chakravarthy"
date = "2003-03-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-March/004508.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2003-March/004508.html)

Namaskaaram,

TO MY FELLOW ADVAITINS

Now we all Advaitins, know that Maya is anirvachaniya, as it is neither
real, nor unreal, nor both real and unreal, nor neither of the two. But you
see, a Dvaitin boasts of something called *valid perception* and says that
there can be only two things, real or unreal. Please allow me to take the
pleasure of exposing the sophistry behind the Dvaitin's arguments.

In the Part 1, we have already seen that prameya#3 collapses. Now we will
take a look at prameya#3 again.

The pseudo-logical web-site www.dvaita.org claims that the entities being
real the differences are also real.

QUESTION 1.
What if one of the entities in unreal and the other is real?

ANSWER 1.
Why should I answer this question?

QUESTION 2.
How else will you differentiate the real and unreal? If you cannot answer
this question, then the difference between the real and unreal is not
addressed and so Dvaita can be thrown into the dustbin. And mind you, this
difference is not just a difference in properties. No more boastings of
Dvaita being a complete or logical philosophy.

ANSWER 3.
OK. OK. I say the difference between the real entity and unreal entity is
inherent to the entity.

QUESTION 4.
Which entity? The real one or the unreal one. In Part 1, we have seen that
the difference between entity 1 and entity 2 being equivalent, if this
difference is inherent to the first entity, then it must be inherent to the
second.

REPLY 4.
OK. The difference between the real and unreal is inherent to both the real
and unreal entities.

QUESTION 5.
As this difference is inherent to the real entity, the difference is real.
And as the difference is inherent to the unreal entity, the difference is
unreal. So, is this difference real or unreal? Remember that Dvaita does not
accept any stage of reality other than the real and the unreal. So, even
according to Dvaita, what is this difference?
IS THE DIFFERENCE REAL OR UNREAL?

NOW TO MY FELLOW ADVAITINS

Now my friends, dont you think that the sophistry of Dvaita in accepting
things to be only real or only unreal is exposed? Even by their own
pseudo-logic, they directly arrive at an entity, which is other than real
and also other than the unreal. Thus, the Dvaitin is deceiving himself when
he says that there is no such thing as "neither real nor unreal, nor both,
nor neither".


THUS DVAITA CAN BE THROWN INTO THE DUSTBIN.

Best Regards
Kalyan



_________________________________________________________________
Get more buddies in your list. Win prizes http://messenger.msn.co.in/promo

