+++
title = "155 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2006-10-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017683.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-October/017683.html)

Nmaste Vankata Subramanian-Ji:

  Hope moderators will not abject this post as it may go beyond the scope of the list and request Moderators to terminate the thread if they feel so.

  Before one tries to classify them one must ask and looks for their utility as medicine and food.

  VagbhaTTa has used it extensively in his formulations as food and as dried powders as well as soup.  I have no hesitation in saying that he (along with others) must have experimented and determined it's properties. He had used it for improving blood circulation.  Now how this blood circulation must have been improved gets answered when we look at the controlled studies for lowering LDL cholesterol, Hyperlipidemia, Lowering of blood pressure,  The sulfur content apparently plays a critical role as powerful anti-microbial agent.  So some of the intestinal pathogens gets killed.  So the nutrients present in the surroundings can get assimilated by the body rather then by the pathogens.  To me this is the real "bhishaja yaj~na" or the real spirituality of that bhushaja yaj~na, which is prescribed during and right after our rainy season.  As various forms of invisible "rudra gaNa" are hidden in the various foods as well as the cooking utensils.  So, VagbhaTTa used it for its
 anti-microbial properties.  A very close friend of mine, Dr. Larry Lawson has published extensively on the medicinal properties of Garlic.  There are over 500 clinically researched articles on Garlic.  That does not include the Ayurvedic formulations by the way.

  Now, why these foods may have been isolated as being problematic by the ascetic is also very important to understand.  Now if your lipid levels, tri-glycerides including cholesterol goes down then it will automatically reduce your blood pressure and improve the blood flow at the same time.  What happens when blood flow increases can be very well imagined by the intellectual readers!?  Therefore, to curb such in-voluntary desires to be eliminated our ancestors might have suggested a ban on the consumption of Garlic for ascetic sannyasii.  Lake the saying in Hindi, " naa rahe baa.nsa na baje.n baa.nsuri" (Meaning - if there if the no bamboo then their will be no possibility of a flute !?.).

  So before making a judgment call and classifying one must look at it objectively.  Kalidaasaa's word always echo when I think of these things. "puraana mityeva na saadhu sarvaM na caapi kaavyaMa nava mitya vadyam."

  I hope this may help answer your question !?

  Regards,

  Dr. Yadu



venkata subramanian <venkat_advaita at yahoo.com> wrote:
  What about Onions and Garlic. i think we cannot consider them at all.

"Dr. Yadu Moharir" wrote: Now advances in the understanding of nutrition using the bio-chemistry as the backbone one can try to understand the relationship in "food and raajasika / taamasika, saatvika" and our current understand may not be necessarily correct.




Thanks & Regards,
Venkat.

Sadgurubhyo Namah.

---------------------------------
Talk is cheap. Use Yahoo! Messenger to make PC-to-Phone calls. Great rates starting at 1¢/min.
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org



---------------------------------
 All-new Yahoo! Mail - Fire up a more powerful email and get things done faster.

