+++
title = "24 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2010-09-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025476.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025476.html)



Dear Bhaskar:

Here is some additional
information about satya pir & satya naaraayaNa connection in one of the
research books.









Human
fertility cults and rituals of Bengal: a comparative study

By
Pradyot Kumar Maity

Abhinav Publications, 1989



http://books.google.com/books?id=gJS1slWE4X4C&pg=PA110&lpg=PA110&dq=satya+pir&source=bl&ots=q4580itoVS&sig=ns_g5SEKRpr1hSpgybdf8hGbe-c&hl=en&ei=m_2RTJKnEZC-sQPZy-XACg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=9&ved=0CDkQ6AEwCA#v=onepage&q=satya%20pir&f=false



http://tinyurl.com/24ahba8



Please read pages 17, 109, 110, 111, 123, 126, 165, and 217.



***************************************



The satya pir story (vrata katha) as I have found through other sources is as
follows:











http://learningobjects.wesleyan.edu/naya/scrolls/09_shotopir.html



Satya
Pir

Jamuna Chitrakar

Where
     are you o Satya Pir; I’m in your hands. Who else but you can save us from
     shame?You
     are Narayan for the Hindus, Pir for the Momins You are famous for having
     sinni (offering) from both the races. Satya
     Pir says—I’ll take the name Satya (truth) & establish my identity to
     the king of Sindhu (Sind?) having
     thought thus Satya Pir went to the kingdom disguised as mendicant (fakir).He
     tells the king—you’ll have a child by my blessings if you worship me.The
     king asked—what are the things that are required to worship you? The fakir
     said—let me tell you first. You
     must give me a house & tie a cow & her calf there. The
     king & queen promised to do it. Some time later a son was born to
     them.They
     forgot all about the sinni. Then the child died from cholera & small
     pox. Oh
     what bad luck? I’ve lost everything in my old age.The
     omniscient one came to know & appeared to the king & said in his
     heart How
     could you forget to give me sinni?In
     his sleep the king showed arrogance. In sorrow the Pir went to the forest.
     The
     royal couple went for trade on a ship. The ship sank in the deep sea.The
     king & the queen invoked Satya Pir to save them.Listen
     to me—king. Why did you make promises? Both
     the king & the queen said—Baba, if you save us from drowning we’ll
     keep our promise. By
     the grace of the Pir, the sunken ship came up at the bank The
     dead child was brought to life. The king & queen worshipped the Pir
     once they reached home. A
     golden shelter was provided & a cow with her calf tied to it.The
     queen offered sinni & cooked food to Pir. From that day the worship of
     Pir became popular.Sanatan
     Mondol was a well known miser of the village. He refused to worship the
     Pir. A
     tiger bit the rascal on his shoulder while a crocodile was pulling at his
     legs. He
     was dying from being pulled apart from both sides. His fellow villagers
     said look the miser is dying.Let
     the scoundrel die. What had he left for this world?

I
end the tribute to Pir here. Both Hindus & Muslim bow to him


Regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Thu, 9/16/10, Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com> wrote:

From: Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] pUrvajas' karma / pApa & our burden (satyanArAyaNa pUjA)
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Thursday, September 16, 2010, 10:44 PM

Dear Bhaskarji,

It seems there is an anecdote in Bengal linking the worship of 
Satyanaaraayana to one Satya-pir, a Muslim saint. It could be that 
Satya-pir worshipped Lord Narayana in a particular way, say by using one 
and quarter measure of the the offered items in the Naivedya.

praNAms Sri Sunil prabhuji
Hare Krishna

Thanks for sharing this interesting additional information..Infact I 
didnot know that even in Bengal people would observe this vrata!!

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




