+++
title = "26 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2010-09-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025454.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-September/025454.html)



>From the historical perspective and assimilation of ideas from others, here is something that may interest some members. Only after reading this and reading P.V. Kane's History of Dharmashastra I had posed the question to the list.

Link to the full paper and exert from Professor Sharma's Paper is given below:

http://archiv.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/volltextserver/volltexte/2008/8015/pdf/HPSACP_Hegewald_Mitra_final.pdf



Quote

Another key feature of the Jagannatha cult is the incorporation of Islamic sacred beliefs within Hindu rituals and social practices. The quintessential story is that of Salabega – the “offspring of a Muslim subedar of Cuttack and a brahmin woman ... who learnt from his mother a great deal about ... (and subsequently) became a great devotee of Jagannatha ... The prayer verses composed by him are sung ... in mass prayers and inside temples. Both the Hindus and Muslims claimed his body when he died. Then there was a compromise and his body was buried by the side of the Chariot-route of Lord Jagannatha at Puri so that his spirit could see Jagannatha every year during the Car Festival.” (Mishra, 1984: 8). Other instances of local practices that combined Hindu and Muslim rituals include Satyanarayan Puja where Hindus and Muslims share the offering known as sirini prasada, offered to God, referred to as Satyanarayan by Hindus and Satyapira by Muslims
 (Mishra 1984: 9).

Unquote

If this is beyond the scope of the list please communicate Off-List. ymoharir at yahoo.com

Best regards,

Dr. Yadu

--- On Tue, 9/14/10, Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com> wrote:

From: Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] pUrvajas' karma / pApa & our burden (satyanArAyaNa pUjA)
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Date: Tuesday, September 14, 2010, 11:49 PM

I would appreciate if someone can provide any specific evidence of this 
ritual-practice in Southern India. 

praNAms Sri Yadu prabhuji 
Hare Krishna 

I am from smArta brahmin family (not Telugu, I am Kannadiga ) from 
Karnataka and we have been doing this vrata every year...Though normally 
we dont see any vAra, tithi, nakshatra to observe this vrata, most of the 
times we do this vrata on ekaadashi day at pradOsha kAla and next day 
dvAdashi we have mahA naivedya and as usual have a sumptuous brAhmaNa 
bhOjana :-)) it is believed in our saMpradAya that it is auspicious to 
do vrata on paurNami day (full moon day).And procedure of this vrata is 
also very elaborated one and in this vrata we do nava graha, indrAdi ashta 
dikpAlaka, drugAdi sAdguNya devata-s AvAhana in navagraha dhAnya & kaLasha 
 & offer them pooja..And after this, we do prANa pratishtApana, offer 
shOdashOpachAra pooja to 'saparivAra sameta Sri lakshmi satyanArAyaNa' 
through purusha sUkta & purANOkta shlOka-s...and finally, prasannArghya & 
ashtAvadhAna seva...Here in Bangalore, it is very popular vrata among some 
of vaishya families also...Here local Arya vyshya sangha observe this 
vrata every year in a very big scale (108 couples do this pooja at a 
time!!) with non-stop (akhanda) vishnu sahasranAma parAyaNa...I, myself, 
perform satya nArAyaNa vrata 30-35 times in a year as a 'priest' :-)) 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!! 
bhaskar 
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org




