+++
title = "11 D.V.N.Sarma"
date = "2004-02-04"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012653.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2004-February/012653.html)

saktAh karmaNyavidvAMso yathA kurvaMti bhArata
kuryAdvidvAMstathAsaktaScikIrshurlOkasaMgrahaM. Gita 3-25

Just as unlearned do things with attachment, the learned should 
also do things but  without attachment, wishing to help the world.

In the above it is clearly implied that the learned should do things 
with as much of care and intensity as the unlearned and aiming at 
success. But he should be unaffected by the outcome.

Hope it helps.

regards,
Sarma.
On 3 Feb 2004, at 10:36, INTEGRAL SERVICES wrote:

> "What is today's competitive world?  In olden times people used to kill
> each other for food.  Isn't that competitive?  How is today different?
> 
> Artha and kama are valid purusharthas for a grhastha when disciplined by
> dharma but even then one has to soberly look at the situation and examine
> ones assumptions and motives.  People lie to each other but the saddest
> thing is they often lie to themselves."
> 
> Dear Jaladhar ,
> 
> May be what I said regarding competetion was wrong. But the point I want to make is - if we want 
to succeed, we will have to play for a win. We will have to enter the game of life with a desire fo
r success. An attempt cannot be called a sincere attempt unless it is made with an aim to succeed. 
The only thing is that, after we make a sincere attempt, we should give up the ownership of success
 or failure and dedicate it to the lord. I think if we are not aiming for success in our endeavour 
we will be seriously lacking in performing one of the purusharthas.
> -Venkatesh
> _______________________________________________
> want to unsubscribe or change your options? See:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
> Need assistance? Contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org


