+++
title = "133 B.J. Ganesh prasad"
date = "2000-06-18"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000974.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000974.html)

OM,

jyotishya gives a verse

Ashtami cha gurum hanthi shishyam hanthi chaturdashi
pournimi cha ubhayam hanthi pratipat paatha naashini.

ashtami kills the guru, shishya on chaturdashi, poornima kills both, while
pratipat kills the paatha.

A practise of sringeri mutt and its tradition is that, this applies only to
new lessons started on that day, there is no harm if an old lesson is
repeated.

And "vedam nityamadhiyataam"... is true, and the process of anadhyaya
applies only to learning something a new
not repeating the vedas learnt or for svadhyaya.

parashara, tells the reason for this, it is due to a story found in
theAITAREYA BRAHMANA.

HARIOM,
GP
----- Original Message -----
From: Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
To: <ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG>
Sent: Sunday, June 18, 2000 11:36 AM
Subject: Re: significance of anadhyayana


> On Fri, 16 Jun 2000, Raghavendra Hebbalalu wrote:
>
> > namaste,
> >       In the traditional panchangas, we find several
> > days designated as anadhyayana or sets of days as
> > anadhyayana-traya and so on. I am aware that the
> > adhyayana spoken of there is vedAdhyayana. But I am
> > not aware of the exact reasons of why a particular day
> > is designated so. Is it ordained that vedAdhyayana on
> > that day is a strict no-no ? Or is it all right for
> > vedaadhyayana to be skipped that day ?
>
> I would think the latter.  It is the formal svadhyaya or Brahmayajna which
> is omitted.
>
> >  The second
> > question arises because shrii shankara exhorts us to
> > 'vedo nityamadhiiyataaM'.
> >
>
> Note even on those days the other nityakarmas still have to be performed
> so that would fulfill the requirement.  It would be a good idea to get
> guidance from a learned shastri on this though.
>
> btw. There are certain occasions on which there is anadhyayana but not
> specific tithis.  (Not according to my Panchang anyway.)  There is
> anvadhana though.  On these days even those whoare not agnihotris have to
> do agnisthapana.  Is this the same thing or am I confusing it with
> something else?
>
> --
> Jaldhar H. Vyas <jaldhar at braincells.com>
>
> --
> bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
> Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
> Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.


__________________________________________________
Do You Yahoo!?
Talk to your friends online with Yahoo! Messenger.
http://im.yahoo.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

