+++
title = "102 श्रीमल्ललितालालितः"
date = "2020-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055262.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055262.html)

Chandramouli,
We just tend to say that it is avayava and which can be recognized by only
due process.
That avayava has tAdAtmya with whatever is generated by them.

Raghav,

> I understand the distinction here. Since the avidyA vRttis are there, we
> should say "the vRttis are experienced" but being sAxI pratyaxa ;
>

The ignorance, pleasure, etc. are experienced by sAxI which has
upAdhi(avidyA-vRtti). This avidyA-vRtti or sAxI(which is consciouness
attched to that) causes the saMskAra and then we remember after we wake up.

The avidyA-vRtti is directly illuminated by chaitanya. But, anything
directly illuminated by chaitanya doesn't become vyavahArayogya, similar to
mano-vRtti-s in jAgrat, etc. We need some other pramANa, like arthApatti,
etc. to make them appear clearly.

> we do not
> experience pleasure and ignorance then since that needs antaHkaraNa.
>

Wrong.
We do experience pleasure and ignorance, etc. through avidyA-vRtti or in
other words sAxI(remember previous note added.).

> The
> vRttis leave a saMskAra which is recollected (smRti) upon waking, as
> pleasure and ignorance.
>

The avidyA-vRtti-s is janya and hence it ends and leaves a saMskAra. That
helps generate smRti of pleasure, ignonce, etc. while we wake up.



*श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
