+++
title = "105 श्रीमल्ललितालालितः"
date = "2020-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055265.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055265.html)

You are confused.
The definition you presented is that of samavAya and you are claiming it to
be that of tAdAtmya.
Once you understand the scope of tAdAtmya, you will be able to understand
that your definition doesn't fit.


*श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com


On Sat, Aug 8, 2020 at 7:58 PM H S Chandramouli <hschandramouli at gmail.com>
wrote:

> Pranams.
>
> Reg  << We just tend to say that it is avayava and which can be
> recognized by only due process.
> That avayava has tAdAtmya with whatever is generated by them >>,
>
> The above statement practically conveys no meaning. This is surely not
> Advaita Sidhanta. What we are referring to as tAdAtmya is between two (or
> more perhaps) entities which are manifest and observed/experienced together
> always, and which are not observed/experienced independently of each other
> any time.
>
> I am stopping with this.
>
> Regards
>
> On Sat, Aug 8, 2020 at 6:40 PM श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
> lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:
>
>> Chandramouli,
>> We just tend to say that it is avayava and which can be recognized by
>> only due process.
>> That avayava has tAdAtmya with whatever is generated by them.
>>
>> Raghav,
>>
>>> I understand the distinction here. Since the avidyA vRttis are there, we
>>> should say "the vRttis are experienced" but being sAxI pratyaxa ;
>>>
>>
>> The ignorance, pleasure, etc. are experienced by sAxI which has
>> upAdhi(avidyA-vRtti). This avidyA-vRtti or sAxI(which is consciouness
>> attched to that) causes the saMskAra and then we remember after we wake up.
>>
>> The avidyA-vRtti is directly illuminated by chaitanya. But, anything
>> directly illuminated by chaitanya doesn't become vyavahArayogya, similar to
>> mano-vRtti-s in jAgrat, etc. We need some other pramANa, like arthApatti,
>> etc. to make them appear clearly.
>>
>>> we do not
>>> experience pleasure and ignorance then since that needs antaHkaraNa.
>>>
>>
>> Wrong.
>> We do experience pleasure and ignorance, etc. through avidyA-vRtti or in
>> other words sAxI(remember previous note added.).
>>
>>> The
>>> vRttis leave a saMskAra which is recollected (smRti) upon waking, as
>>> pleasure and ignorance.
>>>
>>
>> The avidyA-vRtti-s is janya and hence it ends and leaves a saMskAra. That
>> helps generate smRti of pleasure, ignonce, etc. while we wake up.
>>
>>
>>
>> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>>
>>
>>
