+++
title = "106 Kuntimaddi Sadananda"
date = "2020-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055266.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2020-August/055266.html)

PraNAms
What exactly is taadaatmya sambandha and how does it differ from swabhavika? Any detailed explanation with examples?
Hari Om!Sadananda



    On Saturday, August 8, 2020, 08:00:32 PM GMT+5:30, H S Chandramouli via Advaita-l <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:  

 Pranams.

Reg << We just tend to say that it is avayava and which can be recognized
by only due process.
That avayava has tAdAtmya with whatever is generated by them >>,

The above statement practically conveys no meaning. This is surely not
Advaita Sidhanta. What we are referring to as tAdAtmya is between two (or
more perhaps) entities which are manifest and observed/experienced together
always, and which are not observed/experienced independently of each other
any time.

I am stopping with this.

Regards

On Sat, Aug 8, 2020 at 6:40 PM श्रीमल्ललितालालितः <
lalitaalaalitah at lalitaalaalitah.com> wrote:

> Chandramouli,
> We just tend to say that it is avayava and which can be recognized by only
> due process.
> That avayava has tAdAtmya with whatever is generated by them.
>
> Raghav,
>
>> I understand the distinction here. Since the avidyA vRttis are there, we
>> should say "the vRttis are experienced" but being sAxI pratyaxa ;
>>
>
> The ignorance, pleasure, etc. are experienced by sAxI which has
> upAdhi(avidyA-vRtti). This avidyA-vRtti or sAxI(which is consciouness
> attched to that) causes the saMskAra and then we remember after we wake up.
>
> The avidyA-vRtti is directly illuminated by chaitanya. But, anything
> directly illuminated by chaitanya doesn't become vyavahArayogya, similar to
> mano-vRtti-s in jAgrat, etc. We need some other pramANa, like arthApatti,
> etc. to make them appear clearly.
>
>> we do not
>> experience pleasure and ignorance then since that needs antaHkaraNa.
>>
>
> Wrong.
> We do experience pleasure and ignorance, etc. through avidyA-vRtti or in
> other words sAxI(remember previous note added.).
>
>> The
>> vRttis leave a saMskAra which is recollected (smRti) upon waking, as
>> pleasure and ignorance.
>>
>
> The avidyA-vRtti-s is janya and hence it ends and leaves a saMskAra. That
> helps generate smRti of pleasure, ignonce, etc. while we wake up.
>
>
>
> *श्रीमल्ललितालालितः*www.lalitaalaalitah.com
>
>
>
_______________________________________________
Archives: https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

