+++
title = "101 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-06-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000952.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000952.html)

Smt. Nanda wrote (collected from different parts of the mail):

Please read the bhAmati yourself.
...
And this I suppose is the trick question which is supposed to pit me against
Shankara himself and thus invalidate my arguments. Any which way you can to
win the argument, I suppose!
...
Sri Anand Hudli wrote (again collections):

Sure.  Stop making personal attacks on GauDapAda, Shankara, and
the other AchAryas. Stop presenting your views as their views. Is this
too much to ask for?
...

Please stop preaching tolerance. This has nothing to do with that.
...

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shri Shankara in Vivekachoodamani, makes mention of 4 requirements and one
of
them being the sadSampatti.  He had written his works with a solemn hope
that his students
will follow it and practice it, not just be content with correctly
interpreting it.

We should not forget the main purpose of all this knowledge ie., putting it
into
practice.  If we slip on that, however sharp our insight be, our knowledge
will
become useless.  But in the *way* we are arguing, are we really following
Shankara ?  "sama, dama" are some of the qualities that Shankara
advised for his students.  Let us try to follow as much as possible.

Sri Vidya, Sri Anand and Smt. Nanda have been educating the rest of the
members
with lot of their research/study.  Very good/happy.  But are we setting a
good
example of what Shankara taught ? (I will leave the answer to each one of
us).
I am not trying to be a goody-goody person here, but I don't want the
argument
to stop because of personality issues.

Look, Shri Ravi has already said that the earlier mail would be his last on
the
topic.  Haven't we lost the inputs of one more wise man in our list ?  If
the
arguments had been posed objectively, politely may be he could have gotten
interested in mAdhyamika, who knows ??

Smt. Nanda, please don't fail to send the remaining portions of your work
too,
as those who might want to go forward can go ahead while you are busy
tackling
questions to earlier parts.

Regards,

S. V. Subrahmanian
svs_shankara at hotmail.com
---------------------------------------
Help ever.  Hurt never.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

