+++
title = "43 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-06-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000925.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000925.html)

Shri Vidyasankar Sundaresan,

My apologies if I hurt you.  I was afraid that there might be some members
who might stifle any attempts at further discussion owing to their dislike
of "vAda".  So I was just trying to highlight an enlightened view of looking
at this discussion.

Your postings are very valuable and immensely help novices like me.  Please
keep it up.  The same applies to Smt. Nanda too.


>From: Vidyasankar Sundaresan <vsundaresan at HOTMAIL.COM>
>Reply-To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
><ADVAITA-L at braincells.com>
>To: ADVAITA-L at LISTS.ADVAITA-VEDANTA.ORG
>Subject: Re: Antiquity of Advaita Vedanta (was Re: An Open Letter to All)
>Date: Tue, 13 Jun 2000 23:51:20 +0000
>
>S. V. Subrahmanian <svs_shankara at HOTMAIL.COM> wrote:
>
> >I have been reading your discussions on the list, though I did not have
> >anything to contribute.  I should admit that initially I was surprised
>that
> >you two were trying to impose each other's views.  But I did one simple
> >exercise and I recommend that to other members too.
> >
> >I just cut out the idea as to who was writing it (ie., associating the
>idea
> >with the person) and just read the thoughts, sometimes even blurring the
> >idea of who is on which side.  It has benefitted me immensely.  The
> >discussions with out the personalities behind them are very illuminating.
>
>Just to clarify, it has not been my intention to impose my view upon
>others.
>And in this thread, I think the same holds true for Nanda also. The idea
>has
>only been to sharpen one's understanding of the issues involved through
>discussion with those who have other views.
>
>It is said, vAde vAde ca tattvajnAnaH - through discussion, knowledge of
>truth develops. In philosophical details, both Advaita Vedanta and
>Madhyamaka Buddhism are very difficult to understand. As you note, there is
>probably no "one" conclusion to this discussion. If there were, the great
>philosophical giants in India would have arrived at it long before now!
>If you are following Anand Hudli's postings on Madhusudana Sarasvati's
>Advaitasiddhi, it should be clear that we are nowhere near the capabilities
>of these past authors. We try, in our own ways, to understand, and to
>convey
>what we understand to others. Hopefully, we learn something in the process.
>
>Regards,
>Vidyasankar
>
>--
>bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>
>Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
>Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
>Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
>            listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
>            SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

