+++
title = "48 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-06-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000935.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000935.html)

S. V. Subrahmanian wrote:

> Shri Vidya and Shri Nanda,
>
> >This is with respect to the ongoing discussion between Vidhya and me
> >regarding the Advaita and the MAdhyamaka traditions. We've been at it for
> >several weeks now and no clear conclusion seems to be coming out of it.
> >We're shooting off points to prove whichever theory we support. So I've not
> >replied to the last post of Vidhya, which contains some genuine arguments
> >which *could* bring a positive conclusion to this issue.
>
> I have been reading your discussions on the list, though I did not have
> anything to contribute.  I should admit that initially I was surprised that
> you two were trying to impose each other's views.  But I did one simple
> exercise and I recommend that to other members too.
>
> I just cut out the idea as to who was writing it (ie., associating the idea
> ... ... ... <snip>

>

>   The Zen Masters used to give koans to their disciples
> who inturn were to meditate on them.  But none of the koans had any answer,
> for the answers were not the purpose of the koans.
>
> Please share your ideas and help us.

I find it difficult to read and contemplate on such material in my office, so I
have taken a hard copy of almost the whole discussion and started reading it in
my home in my own way. Do not be surprised if I jump into discussions at a
later date (if I have something to contribute). Of course, please do continue
the postings.
-- Himanshu

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

