+++
title = "50 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-06-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000955.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-June/000955.html)

I don't know if the earlier attempt went thru.  If it did, sorry for the
duplicate.

Shri Nandakumar,

>In the first place I'm not a woman. American inability to pronounce my
>name,
>has halved it. My full name is Nandakumar.

I stand corrected.

>I'd actually decided to stop posting on the subject since it has given rise
>to so much rancor. And this is not the first time it has happened and if
>one
>goes through the archives the evidence is there for all to see. I shall not
>go into the details as to the reasons behind this.

Please don't stop.  Your articles were good.  I guess people who don't like
it have the freedom not to read.  I am not wise enough to judge whether
something is perfect or not.  But atleast I have something to learn from
your articles.  I request you once more to complete your series.

>Suffice it to say that it was my mistake to have thought that reason would
>prevail. I just keep forgetting old lessons. I thought I'd something to
>tell
>the list members which would improve our understanding of Advaita and
>that's
>the reason that after a long time, I even ventured to write on the list.
>But
>again as I said, it was my mistake.

No it is not.

>Those who're interested in the subject can write to me and I'll send you a
>copy of the whole article.

If you still insist on not posting, can you please send the articles to
svs_shankara at hotmail.com

Regards.
S. V. Subrahmanian
svs_shankara at hotmail.com
---------------------------------------
Help ever.  Hurt never.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

