+++
title = "17 Chelluri"
date = "1998-01-10"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-January/007858.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-January/007858.html)

                                          Brahmaiva Satyam

Somebody told me to read the life histories of mahatmas. Sri Krishna in Gita
says somewhere,  that people follow what their heros did.  He advises Arjuna
to fight not to run away.   My friend sada gave a good response to my request
but one thing I ldid not like.  He said never mind what Ramdas did or
Raghavendra Swami did follow what your self. I did not reach the state to
follow self.   Then why read aboust the biographies of saints and sadhus.  I
disagree with him on this point.

Gautama Buddha, Shankaracharya are my gurus.  Siddartha beat everybody.
He has money, beautiful young wife, he could have anything he want in this
world. He gave all that up to find truth.  No other person did that in
histrory as we know except Nachiketa.   Real renounciation I believe is giving
up everthing when you have it materially and live a hermit life with no
desires except to know the truth.  We can not do that not even sada my friend.
We worry about the paycheck and to get that pay check we have to go to work.
If you conectrate on meditation how  work going to be done.  People say do the
work as puja to god.  Puja to god is different from devotion and
concentration. There is no way one have attachments and live with false notion
I am detached.

If this offends some body please do not.  Enjoy your notions.

My friend I think do the karma pujas, homas that will lead you to next step.
If you do not know how to do pujas do it anyway that you are familiar. The
supre shakti says whether you do it knowingly or unknowingly she will give
full benefit i.e. Knowledge.

I have that belief and I am living with that promice.
                                                                            Na
gy

