+++
title = "272 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-11-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/026013.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-November/026013.html)

It is not due to the "Prarabdha karma"of holymen that they are indulging
in questionable activities,but due to the gullibility and superstition of
our countrymen which has resulted in believing this.

praNAms
Hare Krishna

But frankly, I cannot draw an honest  demarkation line between jnAni's 
vipareeta pratyaya activities and  charlatan's 'real' lustful activities 
to adjudge who is genuine and who is an impostor!! We may have some belief 
(shraddha) in some individual and treat him as a genuine  jnAni and if he 
does anything wrong, we will console ourselves by taking the theory of 
prArabdha karma and resultant 'vipareeta pratyaya'...whereas if somebody 
else indulges in same sort of activity, if that person is out of the 
circle of our faith, we unhesitatingly call him  a fake...As an example : 
we call kashyapa brahma's acceptance to his wife's untimely  demands as an 
occassional vipareeta pratyaya of the jnAni  but  a popular swamy's recent 
 guest room activity as an act of charlatan...Why?? it is because we have 
already have some prejudices on these individuals & accordingly deciding 
ourselves who is jnAni and who is facade!!

And with regard to luxurious life of swamiji's...I dont see any of our 
present day Acharya-s/ swamiji-s/ vedAnta guruji-s using their 'pAda-s' to 
travel from one place to another and preferring 'kuteera' to stay...They 
have always posh cars (their own and devotees as well :-))  at their 
disposal and have well furnished cottages to stay and sumptuous food for 
the 'bhiksha':-))  I dont think we can evaluate the level of jnAna they 
have from their life style...if we do that nobody would qualify:-))

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

