+++
title = "01 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-March/000265.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-March/000265.html)

Anand Hudli wrote:

> On Sat, 26 Feb 2000 09:52:24 +0530, H.B.Dave <hbd at DDIT.ERNET.IN> wrote:
>
> >Vivek Anand Ganesan wrote:
>
> >> c) However, the ArdhanArI form is present only in the
> >>    Shaivite tradition.  The shaivite tradition also
> >>    emphasizes the unity of the devotee with Shiva.
> >>    Is this a later development of Shaivism or was it
> >>    "monistic" all along?
> >Other traditions also, in ultimate analysis, the same concept, but
> >expressed differently. For example Krishna is shown playing Rasa with
> >Radha. Vishnu bears ShriVatsa Chinha on his breast, etc.
> >As far unity with devotee is concerned, it seems Shaivites were always
> >believing in that. Vaishnava (i.e.Bhakti) tradition seems to be
> >following (right from the time of RiVeda) Dvaita approach.
>
>  Is it being suggested that Shaivism is intrinsically or historically
>  advaitic and that Vaishnava bhakti is similarly dvaitic? If so, then
>  how can we explain the existence of advaitic forms of bhagavatism
>  introduced by the saints of Maharashtra, beginning with Sant Jnaneshwar?
>  And how can we explain the existence of both dvaitic and
>  vishishhTa-advaitic (Veera-shaiva) schools of Shaivism in Southern India?
>
>  Anand
>
> --
> bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam
>

The emphasis is on the words "in ultimate analysis" in above. The approaches
are different, the paths are different (up to some distance). For example,  a
Shaivait may repeat "Shivo.ah Shivo.aham" . While he is doing that he has
distinct perception of Dvaita. But that is only till he achieves
"Shivaswarup", then he need not say anything. Similarly for a Bhakta. What I
mentioned was approach, the way of thinking,  and is a general statement. I
think we should not be too much concerned with which school is following
which approach.

-- Himanshu


-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: </archives/advaita-l/attachments/20000301/18da5164/attachment.html>
