+++
title = "279 Dr. Yadu Moharir"
date = "2010-03-31"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/024150.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/024150.html)

Continued from # 4 .....

vaasanaanadiimaahaa.npurii.n. praaNii buDataa.n glaa.ntii karii .
tethe.n uDii ghaaluuni taarii. to sad{}guru jaaNaavaa .. 13..
Meaning – When the flood gates of river named “desire” get opened, “jiiva” is about to drown, that is then jiiva asks for help. One who makes the necessary efforts to save the individual from disaster is sadguru.

garbhavaasa ati saa.nkaDii. ichhaaba.ndhanaachii beDii .
dnyaana de{}uuna siighra soDii. to sad{}guru svaamii .. 14..
Meaning – Due to the shackles of desire result in repeated garbhavaasa (repeated birth). Some one who breaks this cycle for that individual through imparting knowledge is sadguru. This has a direct application in vyavahaara as well. We often come across who give us correct guidance without any expectations or personal agenda, so that we do not have to keep repeating our own mistakes.

phoDuuni shabdaache.n a.ntara. vastu daakhavii nijasaara .
tochi guru maahera. anaathaa.nche.n .. 15..
Meaning – First sadguru deciphers word and takes you the meaning, where ultimate object (we often term it as paramaatmaa). And helps you understand that ultimate objective is within you yourself. 

jiiva yekadesii baapuDe.n. tayaasa brahmachi karii rokaDe.n .
pheDii sa.nsaarasaa.nkaDe. vachanamaatre.n .. 16..
Meaning – jiiva is ekadeshii (meaning one home i.e. shariira), and that is why jiiva is confined within time, place, environment …. etc. A sadguru enlightens the jiiva (an individual) about the brahma svaruupa and the relationship between each other, simply through his words of wisdom. 

To be continued ........ # 5




