+++
title = "155 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-07-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001289.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001289.html)

T Swaminarayan wrote:

> Srimad Bhagavatham comprises of Maha Bharata or only
> the Bhagavad Gita?Please excuse me for my
> ignorance.But, it is better to clear the doubt and  so
> I request any of you to please clarify without getting
> bugged.

ShrimadBhagavatam is a separate text from MahaBharata. It contains 12
skandhas, based on various avataaras of vi.s.nu, out of which da"sama
skandha.h (10th section) gives lila of shrik.r.s.na. The whole text is
characterized by beutiful poetry and comparatively difficult language
(as compared to, say, valmiki raamaaya.na). Some of the best known
prayers are found in Bhagavatam.
-- HImanshu

>
>
> Thanking you in anticipation,
>
> Swaminarayan.
>
> --- "H.B.Dave" <hbd at DDIT.ERNET.IN> wrote:
> > elmec wrote:
> >
> > > "S. V. Subrahmanian" wrote:
> > >
> > > > Just a little note in addition to Shri Lataji's
> > posting:
> > >
> > > Hari Om,
> > > Just a small correction here. Lataji is Shrimathi
> > and not Shri.
> > > Regards,
> > > Shrimathi Latha Vidyaranya
> > >
> > > ( The Bhagavatha rendering is by Pandit Shyam
> > Sunder Paraashar. No 'Sharma' is
> > > there in the name. Sorry.)
> > >
> > > >
> > > >
> > > > I have read the translation of Srimad Bhagavatam
> > as published by Gita Press,
> > > > Gorakhpur (originally through their magazine
> > Kalyana Kalpataru, in 1950's).
> > > > One has to be more inert than a stone to not
> > fall in Love with "Vishnu"
> > > > after reading that rendering.
> > > >
> >
> > The offer to render passages from ShrimadBhagavatam
> > by Shrimati LAtha is welcome.
> >
> > When I read ShrimadBhagvatam, there was always a
> > distinct feeling that Vyasaji is
> > pointing to Advaita only. The opening three shlokas
> > also points to this (IMHO). I
> > request that if this aspect can be brought out in
> > Shrimati Latha's rendering, it
> > will be really a treat. Just a suggestion.
> > -- Himanshu

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

