+++
title = "47 Ravi"
date = "2000-03-03"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-March/000291.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-March/000291.html)

vishaala nilotpala lochanaayai
 vikaasita pa~Nkeruhalochaanaaya |
samexaNayaai vishhamexaNaaya
 namaH shivaayai cha namaH shivaaya || 4 ||


ambaaL's eyes are often described as long extending upto ears.
This is indicated by the term vishaala. HER eyes (left half) are
long and beautiful like nilotpala flower. Lords eyes are radiant
like lotus flowers. IxaNa can mean look or eye. vishhameXana
means some thing odd or different to look at or one who has three
eyes. sameXana means it is pleasing to look at. "sa ma" means
with laxmii, and HER eyes are auspicious and can bestow
prosperity to the devotees. The ardhanaariishvara form is a
beautiful combination of shivaa and shiva. I bow to shrii shivaa
and Lord shiva.

--

Three eyes of shiva-shakti svaruupam has many beautiful
descriptions in saundaryalaharii. In one verse, the right is
compared to Sun, and the left is compared to Moon. The one of
forehead is compared to fire. They respectively produce day,
night and the sandhya kaalam.

--

Once a poetic puzzle was posed to mahaakavi kaLidaasa asking
whether one has seen a flower inside another flower. He replied
that the face of a woman is like Lotus flower and her two eyes
are like nilotpala flowers. It is traditional to relate woman's
eyes with nilotpala flower.

--

Corrections and comments are welcome. My translation may have
errors. Be warned. Corrections will be accepted with gratitude.

--

Ravi

shrii vaidynaatham sadaa bhajeham

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

