+++
title = "174 H.B.Dave"
date = "2000-07-25"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001323.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001323.html)

elmec wrote:

> Hari Om
> Om Namo Bhagavate Vaasudeevaaya
>
> There are some additional points which I thought I should include here.
>
> Naimishaaranya :  This is the place in all Pouraanik stories where the
> Rishis perform their austerities.
> Once all the Rishis prayed to Brahma to suggest them a suitable place to
> do Tapas. Brahma prepared a wheel and shot it towards the Bhuuloka and
> told the Rishis that wherever the ring of the wheel ( nEmi in Sanskrit)
> broke and fell on earth that would be the most suitable place for them
> to perform Tapas. The Rishis followed the wheel and at one place ( must
> be on banks of Ganga , I do not know ) the wheel broke and fell down. (
> nEmishshIryata iti nEmisham  nEmishamEva naimisham ) in a forest region.
> That place became famous as the naimishaaranyam.
>

That is an interesting account about Naimishaaranya.
It may interest the List Members the interpretation of a wheel, it's
peripery (nemi), the spokes (aaraa) and the hub (naabhi) :  naabhi =
(turiya), aaraa = senses (including mana.h) and nemi = the world
perceptions or inputs from the perceived world.
[Image] This figure may help in understanding.  Note that naabhi is
stationary, but the part of the wheel denoted by a small circle aroound it,
on which the spokes are connected, is rotating. That is aanandmaya kosha or
jeevatmaa. Bhuuloka is the gross world. The "wheel" breaking is a person
getting free from attachments to this world.

I hope this analogy may help in understanding the hidden meaning of the
scripture.
Best wishes,-- Himanshu

-------------- next part --------------
An HTML attachment was scrubbed...
URL: </archives/advaita-l/attachments/20000725/ef0becfe/attachment.html>
-------------- next part --------------
A non-text attachment was scrubbed...
Name: /tmp/nsmail397C316F05D00B6.gif
Type: image/gif
Size: 1918 bytes
Desc: not available
URL: </archives/advaita-l/attachments/20000725/ef0becfe/attachment.gif>
