+++
title = "21 v.subrahmanian"
date = "2021-11-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-November/057769.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2021-November/057769.html)



---------- Forwarded message ---------
From: v.subrahmanian <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
Date: Friday, November 5, 2021 at 10:38:37 PM UTC+5:30
Subject: Letter of benediction issued by the Sringeri Peetham upon today's 
event at Kedarnath
To: Advaitin <advaitin at googlegroups.com>


See the image of the Letter 
here:  https://groups.google.com/g/advaitin/c/fBJWoCFmQCU

Sri Sri Jagadguru Shankaracharya Mahasamsthanam
Dakshinamnaya Sri Sharada Peetham
Sringeri 577139


In this holy land Bharata many great men took birth and performed 
extraordinary  ennobling tasks and attained unparallelled  fame. Among such 
exalted men the name of Sri Adishankara Bhagavatpadacharya shines above 
all. When the Sanatana Dharma faced severe affliction and when the Vedic 
path had almost perished, He incarnated in Kalaty, Kerala, refuted the 
systems opposed to the Veda, taught the entire humanity the essence of 
Dharma and with a view to the continued propagation of Dharma, he 
established four Vedic 'Seats' in the holy centres of Puri, Sringeri, 
Dvaraka and Badari. He ascended the Sarvajna Peetha (Seat of Omniscience) 
in Kashmir and giving up the mortal coil in the holy Kedar returned to 
Kailasa.

Thus it is said -

अवतीर्णश्च कालट्यां केदारेऽन्तर्हितश्च यः । चतुष्पीठप्रतिष्ठाता 
जयताच्छङ्करो गुरुः ||

[Glory to Guru Shankara who having incarnated in Kalaty, founded the four 
Peethas. and ended His earthly sojourn in Kedar.] 

Hence all followers of the Sanatana Dharma ought to remember Him always and 
express their gratitude to Him. We are extremely pleased to know that 
keeping this in mind the Prime Minister of Bharata, Hon. Narendra Modi ji 
will be consecrating in holy Kedar the beautiful image of Sri 
Shankaracharya on Thursday, the first day of the shukla paksha of the month 
of Kartika (5.11.2021). On this occasion we extend our blessings to all the 
followers of Sanatana Dharma.

We pray that the Lord confer upon the Prime Minister who has taken up such 
a noble task, a long life, health, etc.   

Sringeri
Plava, Ashvayuja Krishna Dvadashi
Monday 2.11.2021                                                            



    Narayana smaranam
