+++
title = "202 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2017-07-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-July/045964.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-July/045964.html)

Namaste Praveen Ji,



Reg  << Bhamatikara
Vachaspati Mishra accepts DSV with NJV not EJV. That is not to say that he
is against DSV. Someone who has Bhamati reference for this may kindly
quote the same, since I haven't studied Bhamati text proper.>>,



I am not sure if  the following meets with the reference you have asked
for. Prof Suryanarayana Shastri, in his introduction to Bhamati, observes
as follows.  Quote



<< And In so far as he insists on the reality of other spirits, and of our
duties and obligations in relation to them up to the stage of final
realization, Vachaspati’s doctrine (as also that of Mandana from whom it is
derived) should be characterized as realistic rather than idealistic. The
stream that culminates in the solipsism of Prakashananda does not have its
source in Mandana or Vachaspati. >>



Prof Shastri cites the following portion of Bhamati in this regard. Bhamati
,after some discussion, concludes as follows



<<न च प्रकाशस्यात्मनो विषयाः ; ते हि विछ्छिन्नदीर्घस्थूलतयानुभूयन्ते ;
प्रकाशष्चायं अन्तरोऽस्थूलोऽनणुरह्रस्वोदीर्घष्चेति प्रकाशते ;
तस्माच्चन्द्रेऽनुभूयमाने इव द्वितीयष्चन्द्रमाः
स्वप्रकाशादन्योऽर्थोऽनिर्वचनीय  एवेति युक्तमुत्पश्यामः। >>



<<  na cha prakAshasyAtmano viShayAH ; te hi
viChChinnadIrghasthUlatayAnubhUyante ; prakAshaShchAyaM
antaro.asthUlo.anaNurahrasvodIrghaShcheti prakAshate ;
tasmAchchandre.anubhUyamAne iva dvitIyaShchandramAH
svaprakAshAdanyo.artho.anirvachanIya  eveti yuktamutpashyAmaH| >>



Translation by Prof Shastri  <<  Nor are objects of the very nature of
light (ie., of consciousness, as the VijnAnavAdins  say) ; yhey are
experienced as finite, as long or gross, while light manifests itself as
internal, neither gross nor subtle, neither short nor long. Therefore, we
see fit to hold that the object, which is other than the self-manifest, is
certainly indeterminable, like the second moon experienced along with the
moon. >>.



Looks like Bhamati resorts to SDV and not DSV.



Regards
