+++
title = "47 Dr. V. Prasanna Shrinivas"
date = "2007-12-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-December/019620.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2007-December/019620.html)

Namaste

The giita verse cited here is in the context of conducting which pertains to
vyavahara dasha. If one were to conduct like Sri Sadashiva Brahmendra, will
he wear the dik as his dress? It is beyond doubt that Sri Sadashiva
Brahmendra was a great man.

As a jivanmukta acharya shankara could have lived in caves...what has he to
teach...what has he to learn...kim paThaniiyam, kima paThaniiyam...why
should he write the bhashyas...why should he undertake vijaya yatras...It is
for dharma prachara, impart sadaachara and instil bhakti which will
ultimately bend the mind inwards.

The common denominator of the recipients of the blessings of Acharyal would
know that whoever had these qualities irrespective of caste, creed, color or
gender had the following qualities to start with...not to mention others.

amAnitvamadambhitvamahi.nsA kShAntirArjavam.h .
AchAryopAsanaM shauchaM sthairyamAtmavinigrahaH

That apart, even here judging the conduct of a a great jivanmukta with
ignorance accumulated over years is a practical example of adhyasa.

acAryapAdareNu.




On 12/10/07, K Kathirasan NCS <kkathir at ncs.com.sg> wrote:
>
> Namaste Kashyapji,
>
> Pls see this gita verse:
>
> yad yad acarati sresthas tat tad evetaro janah
> sa yat pramanam kurute lokas tad anuvartate
>
> "Whatever action a wise man performs, the common men follow. And
> whatever standards he sets by his acts, the world follows." (3:19)
>
> Therefore the subject you have mentioned is NOT 'totally' irrelevant.
> But perhaps not that relevant for a mumuksu or jijnasu.
>
> Warmest Regards,
> Kathirasan K
> -----Original Message-----
> From: advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> [mailto:advaita-l-bounces at lists.advaita-vedanta.org] On Behalf Of
> Kashyap M
> Sent: Saturday, December 08, 2007 9:47 PM
> To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
> Subject: [Advaita-l] Regarding conduct of Swamijis
>
> Dear people,
> My pranams to all of you.
>
> Some mails are being circulated which is telling about the conduct of
> Swamijis etc.
>
> I would like to say that we should be clear about what we want from
> Swamijis. Whether he moves only with the priests or Brahmins or some
> other people is totally irrelevant.Our only goal should be that of unity
> with our true self.
>
> In that context all the things mentioned are totally irrelevant. We
> should try to be honest seekers of knowledge. We are not here to observe
> his duties or the way he conducts himself.After all he also has the
> responsibility of running a
> huge institution like the Matha etc,so he has to mix with specialised
> people and we need not be irked by that.
>
> Moreover his responsibilities and way of conduct would have
> been advised by his Guru.
>
> I have read a few books on Sri Sri Sri Chandrasekhara Bharathi Swamiji
> and he always used give instructions either in the form of verbal
> communication or just a glace to any seeker who was honest,irrespective
> of any race or caste or any such thing. We even see instructions given
> to people belonging to Muslim and Christian faith.
>
> After all what we want from Swamijis is the grace and blessing hence
> we need not break our head thinking about their daily conduct towards
> outside world.
>
> I offer the words in this mail to the lotus feet of the Divine Mother
>
> I apologise if there is any mistake in the above.
>
> HARI OM
>
> Kashyap
>
>
>
> ---------------------------------
> Explore your hobbies and interests. Click here to begin.
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

