+++
title = "103 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2010-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026172.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026172.html)

 Namaste.
I have received the following announcement from the organizing committee of
the program with a request to publish it in this forum.  Those interested in
this opportunity are requested to feel free to contact the organizers and
get many of their questions on the program clarified.  As there is not much
time left, I am making this announcement without taking the prior permission
of the Moderators of this forum.

Thanks and regards,
subrahmanian.v
Sri ShAnkara-Tattva-PrasAra-abhiyAnam: Training in Advaita Vedanta

Ø  A two-day workshop on Dec. 25th (Saturday) and 26th (Sunday) 2010, in
Mysore

Ø  Venue: Sri Sringeri Shankar Math, Mysore.

Details:

With a view to provide an overview of Sri Adi Shankara and the Advaitic
School of thought, a two-day intensive program has been organized in Mysore,
India, on Dec. 25 and 26, 2010. The program is organized with the Blessings
and patronage of H.H. Jagadguru of Sri Sringeri Sharada Peetham, Sringeri,
one of the four prominent Maths established by Sri Shankara to promote
Sanatana Dharma and Upanishadic thought. During the course of the two days,
distinguished scholars will give lectures on the following topics.

·         Familiarization of Indian schools of thoughts – Charvaka, Jaina,
Bouddha, Nyaya, Vaisheshika,  Samkhya and Yoga

·         PUrvamimamsa and Vedanta -  PrasthAna traya

·         Introduction to Advaita Vedanta; Life of Sri Shankara and Advaita
philosophy

·         Non-Advaitic schools of thought

·         Major objections to Advaita philosophy and their refutation

·         Prakarana Texts on Advaita and other Advaita philosophers

·         Hymns by Sri Shankara

·         Science and Social Sciences – Advaitic thoughts in modern sciences

·         Sringeri Guru Parampara and their contribution to Advaitic
literature

·         Relevance of Shankara’s teachings in today’s context

·         Necessary skills in exposition of Advaita Vedanta by discourse

There will be Lecture demonstrations involving debate and Q&A sessions on
these topics.

Study material to complement the lectures shall be provided.

Timings: 8 AM to 7 PM

Accommodation, Breakfast, lunch and Snacks will be provided for the
participants.

Those interested to participate are requested to contact the below mentioned
address with particulars regarding their address, educational
qualifications, vocation, contact details, exposure and experience in
Sanskrit and Vedanta.

Course organizer: Sri H Ramachandra, Dharmadhikari, Mysore Ph: 0821-2456460

Convener: Dr. Shikaripura Krishnamurty, Mangalore; Ph: 9448843322

Co-ordinator: Vidwan Gangadhara Bhat, Mysore,  Sri Subraya Hegde, Sri
Shankara Research Center, Sringeri. Phone: 89047-28949

