+++
title = "176 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2012-06-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-June/032015.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-June/032015.html)

praNAms Sri Karthik prabhuji
Hare Krishna

>  Nice to see you on the board...how are you prabhuji??

Just as Rama showed an apparent ignorance of his real nature, so too did 
Sankara show an apparent ignorance of his real nature. Sankara was playing 
the role of a king and gave his disciples an opportunity to show their 
devotion to their Guru, in the same way as Brahma received an opportunity 
to show his devotion to Vishnu.

>  rAmO vigrahavAn dharmaH, I dont think like shankara in DV, rAma too 
engaged himself in sva-varNAshrama nishiddha activities. IMHO, 
justification like this can be given on each & every questionable activity 
of the person whom we believe he is jnAni or our Acharya, is it not?? 
Since we are the ardent follower of bhagavatpAda, he is our paramAchArya 
we some how have to defend his activities as accounted in dig-vijaya (DV). 
 But an outsider, an objective reader would not let his readings swayed by 
the subjective attachment to the personality in question. 

>  For that matter, the author of DV does not provide this type of 
justification for shankara-s 'sva-varNAshrama viruddha activities'. 
Instead, shankara here defends his stand (with regard to his parakAya 
pravesha) on various other grounds.  And the author does not give even a 
hint for us to believe that shankara here giving an opportunity to his 
disciples to prove their guru bhAkti.  OTOH, he emphasizes, shankara in 
king's body, completely lost himself and was enjoying 'nirargaLa 
brahmAnanda' from the sexual relations with antaHpura stree-s!! He also 
says, shishya-s of shankara had to sing 8 different songs to wake him 
up...And even after realizing his true svarUpa shankara in DV does not say 
anything about apparent & temporary forgetfulness of his real nature for 
the sake of his shishya-s.  If shankara's forgetfulness is for the noble 
cause, I wish the author of DV could have said it somewhere. 

>  Anyway, I heard this type of story even in vishnu's varAha avatAra 
also.  In this case nArada had taken the trouble to take vishNu out of 
varAha, which was enjoying happily with wife & kids in the gutter :-)) 

In fact, Sankara even says in the Dig-Vijayam, "I am equal to 
Maha-Vishnu".

>  Yes, our bhagavatpAda, despite all these DV exaggerations, is brahma, 
vishNu, maheshvara svarUpa for us.  Hence the chanting gururbrahma, 
gururvishNu gurudevO maheshwaraH..

>  Kindly pardon me prabhuji, this is my last post on this subject, 
whatever reply you give to this is final.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar 
