+++
title = "43 Jaldhar H. Vyas"
date = "2008-09-27"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-September/020780.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-September/020780.html)

Dear Vyasji,

Keshava Kashmiri did meet Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and the Gaidiyas vouch
for it. Yes, the Gaudiya movement began as a splinter of Advaita
Vedanta.  Keshava Kashmiri was a great scholar. He remained undefeated
in life. He belonged to the Nimbarka Sampradaya and he was an old man
when he met Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. The latter was then a young man. The
latter was obsessed with Sanskrit grammar and he challenged Kashava
Kashmiri to a debate on Sanskrit grammar on the following day. The
debate was never held and that is why the Gaudiya people say that
Keshava Kashmiri was defeated by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.  But other
interpretation could be that Keshava Kashmiri convinced Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu about the futility of that obsession, probably like the way
it is said in the Mohamudgara. Keshava Kashmiri on the other hand
initiated the latter. Many, including none other than Ramakrishna
Paramhansa, believe that the Dvaita thinking is a step towards
Advaita. In Bhagawat purana the Lord says that he gives the Jnana to
the ardent devotee and that is nothing but Advaita upadesha that there
is no difference between the Lord and the devotee. Or in other words a
time comes when an ardent devotee finally realises Advaita though he
starts with Dvaita. All Dvaitas may not agree to this as they believe
that the Jivas and Brahman are eternally separate. As a corollary to
that they may not even believe what the Vedas say that  initially the
Brahman was alone  and he wanted to be many . So we have to leave them
alone.

Regards,

Sunil K. Bhattacharjya


