+++
title = "27 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2010-12-02"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026091.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-December/026091.html)

praNAms to all prabhuji-s / mAtAji-s 
Hare Krishna 

Kindly share your daily spiritual routines with the list. Spiritual 
routines of advanced sAdhaka-s & their guidance  would certainly help the 
neophytes like me to proceed meaningfully  in spiritual path...Kindly 
allow me to start with my routines : 

In short, normally I wake up around 5 in the morning, after nitya daihika 
karma-s, I do sandhyavandana, laghu devatArchana and vedAdhyayana for 
about one and half hour (timings may wary if there is an early morning 
live cricket matches in television :-))..I follow cricket matches very 
closely and I am still playing  cricket for my company) by 6-45 I go to 
play shuttle badminton and by 8.30 I will be in office, till 6 or 6.30 I 
will be here in office doing work...Leisure time during office hours, as 
you all know I will be troubling you with my mails :-))  by 7 or 7-30  I 
reach home do the sAyaM (ofcourse not so regular in sAyam sandhya as I 
have to stay late at office during audit times) and shankara bhAshya 
adhyayana with svatantra grantha-s of my parama guruji Sri SSS.  Saturday 
and Sunday are off for me, if there is no pooja / homa programme ( I am 
also a part time  purOhit/priest)   I do spend my time in vedAdhyayana, 
saptashati pArAyana, vedAnta chintana etc. Ofcourse, giving sufficient 
time for my family for outing, cinema, functions etc.  chess games, 
cricket, badminton etc. Overall, nothing so special & worth 
mentioning...It is a monotonous routine of the typical South Indian 
smArtha brAhmin who is bit spiritual in his thinking.  I must say here 
there is no long duration japa, meditation in my routine and my spiritual 
activity is just a part of my routine materialistic activity without any 
special emphasization on it!!.. 

Kindly do share your spiritual routines...My special and humble request to 
Sri Vidya Shankara prabhuji, Sri Jaldhar Vyas prabhuji, Sri  Ravi 
Mayavaram prabhuji, Sri Siva Senani Nori prabhuji, Sri Devanathan 
(antaryaami) prabhuji, Sri Ananda Hudli prabhuji, Sri Subbu prabhuji, Sri 
Srikanta prabhuji and ALL the elders, seniors, juniors & knowledgeable 
members of this group. 

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!! 
bhaskar 
