+++
title = "348 V Subrahmanian"
date = "2017-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/044145.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-January/044145.html)

Dear Friends,

In our journey on the path of Vedānta the need for committed study has been
emphasized by the tradition handed down to us. The Upaniṣad itself teaches
śravaṇam, mananam and nididhyasanam based on authoritative sources. It
would benefit our quest much more if we, in the present day, inculcate the
practice of being in touch with noted scholars. There are quite a number of
such accomplished scholars today in India who are only too willing to help
us by clarifying doubts, guiding us with the proper texts, etc. Even though
some traditional scholars may not be very well versed in English, yet they
can in some or the other way establish a dialogue with us if only we
initiate it with them.

Then, scholars there from all language backgrounds in India, both in the
South and in the North. Thus Sanskrit, Hindi, Tamil, Kannada, Telugu,
Marathi, etc. can be employed to converse with them. With telephone and
email we can be in touch with them on topics of Vedanta, Samskrita, Nyaya,
etc.

Just last week a friend of mine in Chennai spent hours over days with MM
Sri Krishnamurti Sastrigal, taking his help in making corrections to a book
the former has translated. Many others have consulted other scholars on
various such purposes and benefited from the treasure house of knowledge
that they are.

I think we have to shed any inhibitions we might have and go all out to
make the best use of their rich resources.  We can collectively prepare a
list of such scholars and their contact details and make that available to
members.

I request other members interested in this to come forward with whatever
information they have to make this initiative a workable one.

Thanks and regards
subrahmanian.v
