+++
title = "139 Ms. Aikya Param"
date = "1996-11-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005549.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005549.html)

----------
From:  Ms. Aikya Param[SMTP:aikya at ix.netcom.com]
Sent:  Tuesday, November 19, 1996 9:01 AM
To:  'sadananda'
Subject:  RE: JIVA-MAN

Namaste mitraaNi,

Sadaananda has written a nice essay.  Thank you.

In one place something jumped up at me. If I am wrong I'm
sure someone will chime in. The quote from
Kaivalya with which we so often greet the swamis says

----------

Na karmana na prajayaa dhanena
tyaage naiki amrutatva maanasuH|
 ^tyaagenaaike^   ^amR^itatvam.h aanashuH

broken down second line
   tyaagena eke amR^itatvam.h aanashuH

##aanashuH## is third plural aorist form of
##nash## 1 P , to reach, attain or find.

In the first line ##prajayaa## means "by progeny".
Perhaps if one has a large family and is well
loved that is also popularity.  That's a nice
thought but maybe here it refers to  having children,
beloved by them or not.

So the verse meaning is

"Not by karma (action) nor by
progeny, nor by wealth, but only by
renunciation one attains immortality."

Aikya

>From  Tue Nov 19 21:56:08 1996
Message-Id: <TUE.19.NOV.1996.215608.GMT.>
Date: Tue, 19 Nov 1996 21:56:08 GMT
Reply-To: kstuart at mail.telis.org
To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ken Stuart <kstuart at MAIL.TELIS.ORG>
Subject: Re: JIVA-MAN
Comments: To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
In-Reply-To: <Pine.LNX.3.95.961118215347.12635B-100000 at cancerous.braincells.com>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Hello,

On Mon, 18 Nov 1996 21:59:54 -0500, "Jaldhar H. Vyas"
<jaldhar at BRAINCELLS.COM> wrote:

>It is not neccessarily easier as there is a danger of becoming attached to
>the saguna ishvara.

You say this as if saguna ishvara were a rock or a tree.

The only danger in becoming attached to saguna ishvara is moksha.  :-)

Saguna Ishvara is not an inert object, it is the most powerful entity
in the universe, capable of bestowing jnana or any other state.   It
is not bound by the laws of karma, etc. as it is both the
manifestation and adminstrator of those laws.

Total attachment to saguna ishvara, without any attachment to one's
own identity, is ultimately just as effective as any other method - as
long as one can achieve that complete devotion.

The life of Tukaram Maharaj is a fine example.


Namaskar,

Ken

kstuart at mail.telis.org

>From  Tue Nov 19 22:00:05 1996
Message-Id: <TUE.19.NOV.1996.220005.GMT.>
Date: Tue, 19 Nov 1996 22:00:05 GMT
Reply-To: kstuart at mail.telis.org
To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ken Stuart <kstuart at MAIL.TELIS.ORG>
Subject: Re: ?
Comments: To: "Advaita (non-duality) with reverence" <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
In-Reply-To: <199611190353.WAA19757 at daisy.snet.net>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Hello,

On Mon, 18 Nov 1996 22:53:28 -0500, M & E Shearn <peacewrk at SNET.NET>
wrote:

>dear list
>the question arises here, again, can realization of the Absolute, (which I
>imagine the only point) which is the Truth, which is the Self - which is
>Advaita Vedanta - be helped by discusion held by ajanis?
>is this a place of knowledge or are we just 'proving' our own views?

Both.

The value is that each person's writing has some knowledge in it that
is valuable to others, and also has some errors that are of value to
the writer when the errors are corrected by the others.

>now there is one wiser than The Maharshi

Who would that be?

>and the christian chat room is less dogmatic!

Ha Ha !  :-) :-)


Namaskar,

Ken

kstuart at mail.telis.org

