+++
title = "190 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2014-02-15"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-February/036585.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2014-February/036585.html)



Sent from my iPad

Begin forwarded message:

> From: Aravinda Rao <karavind09 at gmail.com>
> Date: February 15, 2014 at 2:04:42 PM GMT+5:30
> To: "Br. Pranipata Chaitanya" <pranipata at hotmail.com>, advaitin at yahoogroups.com
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Doubt in Isha Upanishad
> 
> Namaskaras, 
> 
> This is with ref to the doubt of Sri Nitin.
> 
> In the above article. I had followed what Sri Shankaracharya had explained in the Brihadaranyaka bhashyam.
> The word 'AdAya' is from the root '(du)dA~n dAne', i.e. in the sense of giving. 'A' is the upasarga which changes the meaning into 'taking'; thus 'AdAnam' is taking. The form 'AdAya' is by the addition of 'lyap'  to the root and it means 'having taken, i.e ' gRRhItvA'. this is the literal meaning which the acharya first explains and then gives the figurative meaning as per the context - which is 'having understood, having realized' (the unity of Atman which is ekarasa, homogenous).
> 
> I have not seen the word interpreted as 'removed/taken away'. Such reference may pl be given.
> Aravinda rao
> 
> 
> 
>> On Sat, Feb 15, 2014 at 6:07 AM, Br. Pranipata Chaitanya <pranipata at hotmail.com> wrote:
>> FYI. Might want to reply.
>> 
>> Sent from my iPad
>> 
>> Begin forwarded message:
>> 
>>> From: Nithin Sridhar <sridhar.nithin at gmail.com>
>>> Date: February 14, 2014 at 11:37:25 PM GMT+5:30
>>> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>>> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Doubt in Isha Upanishad
>>> Reply-To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta <advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
>>> 
>> 
>> 
>>> In the advaita academy link i got this-
>>> http://advaita-academy.org/Articles/Ishavasyopanishat--Series-%28Part-1%29.ashx
>>> 
>>> *पूर्णस्य = कार्यात्मनो ब्रह्मणः, पूर्णम् = पूर्णत्वम्, आदाय = गृहीत्वा,
>>> आत्मस्वरूपैकरसत्वम्-आपाद्य विद्यया, अविद्याकृतम्
>>> भूतमात्रोपाधि-संसर्गजम्-अन्यत्वावभासम् तिरस्कृत्य, पूर्णमेव =
>>> अनन्तरम्-अबाह्यम् प्रज्ञानघनैकरसस्वभावम् केवलम् ब्रह्म अवशिष्यते।*
>>> 
>>> 
>>> pūrṇasya, of the infinite; kāryātmano brahmaṇaḥ, the Brahman which is the
>>> effect; pūrṇam = pūrṇatvam, infinitude; ādāya = gṛhītvā, having realized;
>>> vidyayā, by knowledge; ātmasvarūpaikarasatvam-āpādya, having realized it as
>>> essentially the same as Supreme Atman; anyatvāvabhāsam, the apparent
>>> feeling of separateness; saṃsargajam, arising out of the identification;
>>> bhūtamātropādhi, (with the) limiting adjuncts of the beings; avidyākṛtam,
>>> (which is) the effect of ignorance of Atman; tiraskṛtya, having rejected;
>>> pūrṇameva, the infinitude alone; anantaram, that which has no recess;
>>> abāhyam, that which has nothing outside it;
>>> prajñāna-ghana+ekarasa-svabhāvam, that which is of the nature of a vast
>>> expanse of consciousness; kevalam brahma, Brahman which is the only One;
>>> avaśiṣyate, remains.
>>> 
>>> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
>>> 
>>> Here, it says that, Shankara explains aadaya as "gruhitva" or "perceiving".
>>> Can anybody tell me, which is a proper meaning of "aadaya" is it "removal"
>>> or "perceiving/understanding".
>>> 
>>> 
>>> Thank you.
>>> 
>>> 
>>>> 
>>>>> On 14-Feb-2014, at 6:24 pm, "Br. Pranipata Chaitanya" <
>>>> pranipata at hotmail.com> wrote:
>>>>> 
>>>>> 
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> In the Shanti Mantra of Isha Upanishad,
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> *purnam adah, purnam idam purnat purnam udachyate; purnasya purnam adaya
>>>>>> purnam evavasisyate*
>>>>>> The term "adaaya" is everywhere interpreted as "removed/taken away".
>>>> But,
>>>>>> Shankaracharya translates it as "understood/realized".
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> i.e. When the Completeness of the Jagat is realized, Completeness alone
>>>>>> remains.
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> Can anyone shed more light on this?
>>>>>> 
>>>>>> Nithin
>>>>> 
>>>>> Hari Om Shri Nithinji, Pranaams!
>>>>> 
>>>>> While the mantra is occurring as invocation in IshA, AcAryaji has not
>>>> commented but while occuring in bRIhadAraNyaka as mantra V.1.1.
>>>>> 
>>>>> You will see that AcAryaji has not taken a different meaning than
>>>> 'removed/taken away'.
>>>>> 
>>>>> 
>>>>> In Shri Guru Smriti,
>>>>> Br. Pranipata Chaitanya
>>>>> 
> 
