+++
title = "217 Br. Pranipata Chaitanya"
date = "2010-03-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/023943.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-March/023943.html)


Hari Om Shri Subrahmanian ji, Pranaams!



The quoted shloka appear as shloka no: 567 in the sambandhabhAShyavArtika and the meaning of the shloka as translated by Shri SV Aiyar (Chaukhamba Amarbharati Prakashan) is given below.  



The same verse is also quoted and explained by svAmi madhusUdana sarasvati ji in his work prasthAnabhedaH. 


Translatin:  Explanatory remars(arthavada) are of three kinds. In an impossible case it is a figure of speech. In a possible case, it is a praise. If it is a case of neither sort, it is an assertion of fact. 



In Shri Guru Smriti,

Br. Pranipata Chaitanya



-------

Thank you Vidyashankar ji for the response.  I am able to get the three
types of arthavAda.  However, how do we get the full meaning of the verse,
with its anvaya, etc. What is the 'virodha' here that gives rise to the
first type: guNa vAda (I suppose this is what is also known as
'stutyarthavAda')?  What does 'tat hAnAt' mean in the third type?  Is this
shloka of the mImAmsaka-s?

Regards,
subrahmanian.v

On Tue, Mar 9, 2010 at 3:48 AM, Vidyasankar Sundaresan <
svidyasankar at hotmail.com> wrote:

>
> Please check the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies translation at the
> following link (might have to copy and paste into a single line):
>


_________________________________________________________________

Green cities and the melting world
http://green.in.msn.com/
