+++
title = "131 M U"
date = "2008-08-19"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-August/020648.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2008-August/020648.html)

Oh learned ones!

While discussing on "Gotras" would someone help me understand why a woman's gotra is told to be changed to her husband's gotra (and surname) after marriage? It is side-tracking the actual topic but I'm in anveshana and would really appreciate anyone's kind thoughts.This is not a feministic perspective...I'm just a curious learner.

Pranams,
Madhavi.

--- On Tue, 8/19/08, advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org <advaita-l-request at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> wrote:

Message: 2
Date: Mon, 18 Aug 2008 22:24:07 -0400 (EDT)
From: "Jaldhar H. Vyas" <jaldhar at braincells.com>
Subject: [Advaita-l] Fw :Pourakutsa gotra abhivadya (fwd)
To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
	<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Cc: s.ramachandran at hdfcbank.com, s.ram at indiatimes.com
Message-ID: <alpine.DEB.1.10.0808181603420.18829 at jaldhar-laptop>
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; format=flowed; charset=US-ASCII

Sirs,

Thanks. But where did u get this information on Paurakutsa? any
particular person from the Paurakutsa gotra ? Please let this writer know
so that he can establish contact.
The order may be different I think and it also matters. Please
clarify.The order seems to be, repeat seems, I am not sure, "Angiras,
paurakutsa, trasdasya"

Meanwhile, to the best of this writer's knowledge, each gotra Pravara and
Gotra name are unique.

Also it is not necessary that the 5 or 3 pravaras to include the Root
Rishi who is supposed to form the genesis of the Gotra. For instance,

Shreevatsa : Bhargava, chawyvana, apnavana, owrva, jamadangni

Shadmarshana : Angirasa, pourkutsa, trasatsya

__/\__
OM tat Sat
tat tvam asi

Message: 5
Date: Mon, 18 Aug 2008 22:18:37 -0700 (PDT)
From: sthanunathan Ramakrishnan <r_sthanu at yahoo.com>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] :Pourakutsa gotra abhivadya
To: advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Message-ID: <302887.12210.qm at web30201.mail.mud.yahoo.com>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii

I belong to the Pourakutsa gotra (from TamilNadu). The rishis name that we use
match with the list given by Jaldhar (although not in the same order. It goes as
angirasa, trasadasyu and pourakutsa. Is that important ?).

Regd, two different gotras having different set of rishis, Does this mean
shaTamarshana and pourakutsa are just two names for the same gotra ?

> 
> Message: 7
> Date: Sun, 17 Aug 2008 20:00:23 -0700
> From: Vidyasankar Sundaresan
> <svidyasankar at hotmail.com>
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Fw :Pourakutsa gotra abhivadya
> To: A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta
> 	<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
> Message-ID:
> BAY101-W4653699BD878B8D4AC852FDB6E0 at phx.gbl>
> Content-Type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
 The set of 3 (or 5 or sometimes even 7) rishis for a gotra
> is unique. No two gotra-s can share the same pravara.
> However, some gotra-s have multiple names. The parukutsa
> gotra is also called vishNuvRddha, which is the name found
> in the nirNayasindhu and found in usage in the Maharashtra
> region. There seems to be some geographical and/or sectarian
> preference for using one or the other name for one's
> gotra.
>  
> Vidyasankar> Date: Mon, 18 Aug 2008 07:28:07 +0530>
> From: aparyap at gmail.com> To:
> advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org> CC:
> s.ramachandran at hdfcbank.com; s.ram at indiatimes.com>
> Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] Fw :Pourakutsa gotra abhivadya>
> > On Mon, Aug 18, 2008 at 1:35 AM, Jaldhar H. Vyas>
> <jaldhar_at_braincells.com> wrote:> > Anyway,
> paurukutsa gotra has three pravaras: purukutsa, trAsadAsyu,
> and> > angirasa.> > the pravara-s of the
> SaThamarshaNa gotra are also the three RshIs> mentioned
> above (A~NgIrasa, paurkutsa and trAsadasyu). Is it
> possible> that two different gotras can have the same set
> of RshIs or is it the> case that gotra names are
> non-unique?> > thanks,> amudan.>
> _______________________________________________>

------------------------------
_______________________________________________
Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita

To unsubscribe or change your options:
http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l

For assistance, contact:
listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org

End of Advaita-l Digest, Vol 49, Issue 19
*****************************************





