+++
title = "95 Br. Pranipata"
date = "2010-04-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024277.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2010-April/024277.html)

Hari Om Shri Subrahmanianji, Pranaams!

a. bAdhita mithya-jnAna or bAdhita mithya-ajnAna anuvRitti is the senses 
continuing to present the object in the same way eventhough thro right 
pramANa the intellect knows for sure it is to the contrary - like the sky 
continue to appear blue, earth continue to appear flat, appearance of mirage 
etc. As an aspirant the yati without having rAga-dveSha refuse to accept the 
usefulness of the object presented by the senses.  As a jnAni, the yati, 
though the objects are so presented, having no use of them, remain 
unperturbed - ApuryamAnam acalam praThiShTham..(BG 2.70).

b. avidya is atasmin tad buddhiH. or thinking of me and mine.  avidyA lesha 
implies atleast for transactional purposes(the transactional purpose may 
mean lokasamngraha, kevala-deha-paripAlana...), having the notion of me and 
my in BMI.  avidyA-lesha is a samAdhAna and not siddhAnta like shravAt eva 
kaivalyam is siddhAnta but asakrt sacira jnAna-abhyAsAt vastu siddhiH iti 
samAdhAna.

c. vAsanA or saMskAra bala is if before jnana arouse if one was a right 
hander, though jnAna makes him realise there is no difference, he will 
continue to be a right hander and not use the left hand after jnAna for 
which he was earlier using the right hand or vice versa just to proove his 
samatvabhAva. (vAsanA or samskAra here means w.r.to this janmA or prArabdha 
karma only as the other two-saMcita and AgAmi are already destroyed by 
jnAna).

In Shri Guru Smriti,
Br. Pranipata Chaitanya



--------------------------------------------------
From: "V Subrahmanian" <v.subrahmanian at gmail.com>
Sent: Tuesday, April 13, 2010 11:48 PM
To: "A discussion group for Advaita Vedanta" 
<advaita-l at lists.advaita-vedanta.org>
Subject: Re: [Advaita-l] A matter for Adjudication

>
 you may please tell us what are the various differences between the two: 
avidya lesha and bAdhita mithyA jnAna anuvRtti.

> With warm regards,
> subrahmanian.v



