+++
title = "12 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2012-12-06"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-December/033636.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-December/033636.html)

praNAms Bhaskarji,

Brahmajnana is not a karmaphala that it should be necessarily preceded by
samit and praNipAta. Of course approaching a Guru may help. But saying that
the
seeker perforce should approach a guru or should be an adherent of vaidika
dharma
is fundamentalism. We hear about jnanis in other nations who are not
followers of
vaidika dharma. After all God cannot be partial to Hindus only. Do not
forget that followers
every religion in world thinks that they are the chosen ones. Atleast let
us be more
intelligent and wise.


On Thu, Dec 6, 2012 at 10:08 AM, Bhaskar YR <bhaskar.yr at in.abb.com> wrote:

> http://story-of-king-janaka.blogspot.in/
>
> Pl. read the lengthy story there. There was no approaching the Acharya
> with
> samit in hands and prostrations or asking questions about Brahman.
>
> praNAms Sri Subbu prabhuji
> Hare Krishna
>
> I dont know why you are avoiding my repeated questions and asking me to
> read this story.  I am not able to read this story,  anyway,  what you are
> trying to convey from this story to me??  Whether it is, for a sAdhaka
> (who is ready to receive brahma jnAna) there is no need for any personal
> guru or shAstra and he can get enlightenment from any mundane source?? No
> need for him to hold the samit in hands & no need for any prostrations or
> pariprashna process with guru??  I think you have your own interpretation
> for this shruti vAkya as well :  shAstrajnOpi svAtantrYeNa
> brahmajnAnAnveshaNaM 'NA KURYAAT' (emphasis is mine), ityetat 'GURUMEVA'
> ityavadhAraNa phalaM.  Here you are suggesting an alternative for even
> shruti vAkya which clearly insist one should approach 'guru' only
> (gurumeva) and he should not do anveshaNa independently on his
> own..Sometimes very strange your arguments are prabhuji.
>
> Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
> bhaskar
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>



-- 
regards,
Sarma.

