+++
title = "155 V. Krishnamurthy"
date = "2006-08-22"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-August/017314.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2006-August/017314.html)

Dear Sri Parasukhanandanadha-ji,Namaste.

I said I will comment on your concluding statement. You
write:

In my opinion, when jiiva himself is Siva, the question of
merging with god at any time doesnt arise at all.  Only by
the ignorance, Siva is considering himself as jiiva.  Siva
never became jiiva nor there was any jiiva ever existed. 

Wonderful. Only by ignorance, Siva is considering himself
as jiiva. So in order to remove that ignorance, Siva, in
the ignorant stage has to do the sAdhanA and make the jiiva
merge in Siva. This merging means removing the
ignorance . Nothing more. All the sAdhanA, all talk about
merging, -- all these are done in the VyAvahArika level.
They are not done in the ParamArthika level. At the
ParamArthikA level there is nothing to be done. Only
*mauna-vyAkhyA*.

Let us not mix up  the VyAvahArikA level and the
ParamArthikA level. It is like mixing up apples and
apple-carts or like a confusion between the actor and the
role he plays, or a superposition of the dream on the
waking experience. The mahAvAkya tat tvam asi is
addressed to the tvam who is ignorant. If the tvam is
not ignorant, there is no tvam there any more. There is
only tat!

PraNAms to all students of advaita
profvk


Prof. V. Krishnamurthy

Latest addition to my website is the 4-page article on Krishnavatara, the Miraculous. Go to
http://www.geocities.com/profvk/HNG/Krishnavatarapage1.html

