+++
title = "25 Ram Chandran"
date = "2002-02-09"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-February/002311.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2002-February/002311.html)

Namaste Vidyasankarji:

Thanks for the interesting observation that intellect reflects the light of
the SELF. As you rightly pointed out the the mirror needs cleaning before we
can seen the true reflections of the SELF. With ignorance any reflections
from the intellect is necessarily distorted. When the intellect is clean,
the mind is pure and at the highest Samadhi stage there can be no
distinction between mind, intellect and the light (SELF). When there is no
light, only darkness (ignorance) prevails!

I am looking forward to your translation series of Gita. When you start your
series, please post them also in the advaitin list. Your scholarly
observations will certainly benefit more,

warmest regards,

Ram Chandran

On Thu, 7 Feb 2002 15:45:08 -0500, Vidyasankar <vsundaresan at HOTMAIL.COM>
wrote:

>Actually, one can, in the state of the highest samAdhi, in which the
>intellect is made so clear and pure that it is fit to reflect the light of
>the Self. Of course, this state is not that of the Self-in-itself, but as
>seen through the intellect, but the fact remains that the Self can be
known.
>In fact, if one analyzes this a little more in detail, the Self is known in
>every cognition, for without the Self, there can be no cognition at all.
>.......
>
>On this note, I will try to restart my translation series of the gItA
>commentary in a few days. Old-timers on the list may remember that I had
>started it way back in 1998, but did not continue the pace, for various
>reasons. As there are many new members on the list now, and also to
maintain
>continuity of expression, I will start all over again, perhaps once a week.
>
>Vidyasankar

