+++
title = "76 Ms. Aikya Param"
date = "1996-11-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005508.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-November/005508.html)

Namaste Gummuluru

Moksha is used in advaita.  Mumukshutwam or the desire for
moksha is considered a very valuable quality in a human being.

While people feel limited, there will be a desire for moksha from
whatever seems to limit them.  If people can come to see the
spiritual connection and seek a qualified teacher, it is a great
blessing.

If we can look at some people and whisper that we think they
are jiivanmuktas (liberated while living), and perhaps we
wish for such a person as our guru, are we not talking about
moksha accomplished during life?

Aikya


----------
From:  Gummuluru Murthy[SMTP:gmurthy at MORGAN.UCS.MUN.CA]
Sent:  Thursday, November 14, 1996 4:34 AM
To:  Multiple recipients of list ADVAITA-L
Subject:  Re: Advaita 1001

On Wed, 13 Nov 1996, Jaldhar H. Vyas wrote:

> [Some material deleted for brevity]
>
> Karma cannot be wished away.  In order to stop suffering from the effects
> of karma one must stop doing it.  One who knows the self feels a
> natural distaste for karma and gives it up.  Those that don't either
> haven't completely grasped the truth or they are working out the
> residue of karma from previous lives.  A householder can talk about
> Vedanta.  Indeed many people have from King Janaka and Maharshi
> Yagnavalkya to Mandana Mishra and Vachaspati Mishra and Appaya Dikshita
> or for that matter any of the people on this list.  But without tyaga
> there is no possibility of Moksha.
                             ^^^^^^
Are we mistaking something here ?
I do not think there is any moksha concept in Advaita.  Either
you are a jnani or covered by avidya.
Am I wrong ? I would be grateful for clarification.

>
> --
> Jaldhar H. Vyas [jaldhar at braincells.com]  I will choose.-_|\ free will
> Consolidated Braincells Inc.                          /     \
> http://www.braincells.com/jaldhar/   -)==Perth=Amboy=>*.--._/  o-
> "Witty quote" - Dead Guy                                   v      McQ!
>

Regards
Gummuluru Murthy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adau ante ca yan nAsti vartamAnepi tat tathA !
                                GaudapAda in Mandukya kArika
What did not exist at the beginning and what is not going to exist at the
 end is as good as non-existent even in the present.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

