+++
title = "222 Bhaskar YR"
date = "2011-04-26"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/027120.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2011-April/027120.html)

praNAms 
Hare Krishna

Kindly explain what is this Apaccheda Nyaya?

>  I dont know anything in detail about this nyAya..I vaguely remember 
read about this in Sri SSS Kannada commentary on Sri bhAshya of rAmAnuja. 
Does jaimuni talks about it in his sUtra-s??  In short, we can keep some 
statement/concepts in-hold for further clarification, and this 
clarification would supersede the statement/concept which has been held 
earlier.  Not sure of this explanation myself, you can always check with 
scholars in this list.

This is the problem. Why Saguna Sruti for Upasana only? Vedanta Desika 
thinks it can be for Moksha directly.

>  upAsana also would fetch the krama mukti and upAsaka would reach the 
hiraNyagarbha lOka & finally after 'mahA pralaya' he would get the 
ultimate brahma jnAna. 

The Sruti can teach Neti Neti means Doshas and Gunas not in Saguna Sruti 
are not there. 

>   did not get you!!??  shruti says neti neti is the 'highest' teaching, 
it does not say brahma is dOsha varjita & guNa pUrna while exclaiming 
"yato vAcho nivartante aprApya manasa saha" !!?? 

Asthula can be Brahman is Sukshma and inside everything indwelling in 
everything. 

>  No here shruti saying it is neither gross (astUla) nor subtle/sUkshma 
(anaNu) 

This means Brahman has no wordly Gunas we see daily in life. It has Divine 
Gunas only.

>  So, this makes brahman limited & he is restricted himself only to 
divine guNa-s..That is the reason why we say he is sOpAdhika, guNapUrNa, 
apara brahma. 

No it is shoulder height bouncer but when batsman ducks low it will go 
over his head. The batsman cannot call a no ball. The Umpire is not saying 
it is no ball. You can get run out in a no ball.

>  As I said before, when the ball is hit for a big six, where is the 
question of run out, here batsman is not ducking he is 'hitting' it to the 
six :-))

I agree with this. But we must hear what others say and what is their 
perspective and why is Advaita better.

>  Instead of checking others' scholarship on this issue, why dont you 
approach shankara bhAshya for the answer??  you would hear the authentic 
answer 'right from the horse mouth' :-)) ( the new saying which I learnt 
recently from the e-mail discussion :-))

>  BTW you can read more about advaita stand on sOpAdhika upAsya brahma & 
nirupAdhika jneya brahma from shankara's sUtra bhAshya.

Hari Hari Hari Bol!!!
bhaskar

