+++
title = "108 D.V.N.Sarma డి.వి.ఎన్.శర్మ"
date = "2012-03-05"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031042.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-March/031042.html)

The desire to explain away prompted by the fear of losing belief
ultimately truimphs.


-- 
regards,
Sarma.
On Mon, Mar 5, 2012 at 6:58 PM, Venkata sriram P <venkatasriramp at yahoo.in>wrote:

> Namaste,
>
> ///
>
> Acccording to the pravachanam of Brahma Shri Samavedam Shanmukha
> Sharma Garu on lalitopAkhyAyam, the nAmA-s in the popular versions of
> lalitA-sahasranAma have a mistake. They describe
>
> //
>
> Here are the excerpts from Shri Harsha Ramamurty of Kamakoti Mandali:
>
> ******************
>
> In the past, when a question was posed before H H shrI sacchidAnanda
> shivAbhinava nrsimha bhAratI mahAsvAmigal of shringerI shAradA pITham in
> this regard, he smiled and replied, ‘Does it matter? There are several such
> discrepancies between the tales narrated in various purANas.
>
> But if you want a practical answer to satisfy your curiosity, my choice
> would be to go with lalitA sahasranAma’. It must be noted that
> lalitopAkhyAna is not held as an important
> pArayaNa grantha in shringerI maTha on the lines of durgA saptashatI or
> lalitA sahasranAma. H H also favors sahasranAma because of its origin from
> vashinyAdi vAgdevatas, who represent verily the speech of lalitA parA
> bhaTTArikA.
>
> Moreover, sahasranAma is not merely a stotra but also a mAlA-mantra.
> The importance of sahasranAma over other pramANas was also illustrated by
> mahAsvAmigal when someone questioned him regarding
> the structure of bIja, shakti and kIlaka for panchadashI mantra.
>
> H H, after nine days of discussion with several scholars from gauDa,
> gurjara etc., concluded that the pramANa of sahasranAma,
> which also matches what is described in dakShiNAmUrti samhitA and the
> tradition of shringerI maTha, is acceptable (as against tantras such as
> paramAnanda),
> based on the names: shaktikUTaikatApannakaTyadhobhAgadhArinI etc.
>
> In our opinion, this issue is really not worthy of deep contemplation or
> discussion.
>
> If it was, the invincible bhAskararAya would hardly have ignored it
> in his magnum opus saubhAgya bhAskara.
>
> ***********************
>
> Hope it is clear now.
>
> regs,
> sriram
> _______________________________________________
> Archives: http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/
> http://blog.gmane.org/gmane.culture.religion.advaita
>
> To unsubscribe or change your options:
> http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/cgi-bin/listinfo/advaita-l
>
> For assistance, contact:
> listmaster at advaita-vedanta.org
>

