+++
title = "74 Ravi"
date = "1996-10-23"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-October/005360.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1996-October/005360.html)

My respects to you all!

I think it is very difficult to define self-realization. It
may be difficult than achieving it. I am writing this in
resonse to some of the queries about the definition in the
last few days. I did not read all the mail, so forgive me if
the information given here was already given by someone
else.

shrii shrii paramaha.nsa yogaananda gave a definition, when
he was asked after a lecture. This extempore definition from
a self-realized soul can serve as a working definition. But
a logician can still pick some inconsistencies in this.

"Self--realization is knowing -- in body, mind, and soul
-- that we are one with the omnipresence of God; that we do
not have to pray that it comes to us, that we are not merely
near it all the time; but that God's omnipresence is our
omnipresence; that we are just as much part of Him now as we
ever will be. All we have to do is improve our knowing."
                                   Paramahansa Yogananda

Can you  define "red" color to a blind man? Words are very
imperfect. One can argue about these things for eternity.
But it is better to give respect to our "inituitive
understanding" and work from there.

There is a beautiful advice given by Bhagavan Buddha ( in
shrii Rahula Walpola's book "What Buddha Taught?" ) when I
get time I will type it in.

Thank you.

With respects
Ravi
=================================================================
 For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world
and lose his own soul
                        Mark 8:36
=================================================================

