+++
title = "198 Paresh Patel"
date = "2012-10-17"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-October/033389.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2012-October/033389.html)

Namaste Guruji,

My name is Paresh Patel, My kuldevi is Umiya Mataji. I want to worship
Umiyaji everyday. For the Devi Puja I don't have enough knowledge so Can
You please guide me for my daily worship. I don't have Guru. Can you be my
Guru and show me the Path of Devi Bhakti.

it is best to get a Guru who is knowledgeable to give you proper advice.


Thanks.


Paresh Patel

-- 

NOTICE OF CONFIDENTIALITY. This communication, including any information
transmitted with it, is intended only for the use of the addressee(s) and
is confidential. If you are not an intended recipient or responsible for
delivering the message to an intended recipient, any review, disclosure,
conversion to hard copy, dissemination, reproduction or other use of any
part of this communication is strictly prohibited, as is the taking or
omitting of any action in reliance upon this communication. If you received
this communication in error or without authorization please notify us
immediately by return e-mail or otherwise and permanently delete the entire
communication from any computer, disk drive, or other storage medium.

AVIS DE CONFIDENTIALITE. Ce courriel, ainsi que tout renseignement
ci-inclus, destiné uniquement au(x) destinataire(s) susmentionné(s), est
confidentiel. Si vous n'êtes pas le destinataire prévu ou un agent
responsable de la livraison de ce courriel, tout examen, divulgation,
copie, impression, reproduction, distribution ou autre utilisation de toute
partie de ce courriel est strictement interdit de même que toute action ou
manquement à l'égard de celui-ci. Si vous avez reçu ce message par erreur
ou sans autorisation, veuillez en aviser immédiatement l'expéditeur par
retour de courriel ou par un autre moyen et supprimez immédiatement et
entièrement cette communication de tout système électronique.

