+++
title = "81 Dr. Sudhakar Marur"
date = "1998-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-July/009080.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/1998-July/009080.html)

----Original Message Follows----
>From owner-advaita-l at tamu.edu Mon Jul 13 13:16:50 1998
Received: from postal (postal.tamu.edu [128.194.103.24])
        by postal.tamu.edu (8.9.0/8.9.0) with ESMTP id PAA22685;
        Mon, 13 Jul 1998 15:04:49 -0500 (CDT)
Received: from LISTSERV.TAMU.EDU by LISTSERV.TAMU.EDU (LISTSERV-TCP/IP
release
          1.8c) with spool id 12490788 for ADVAITA-L at LISTSERV.TAMU.EDU;
Mon, 13
          Jul 1998 15:04:47 -0500
Received: from lechery.isc.tamu.edu (lechery.isc.tamu.edu
[165.91.114.165]) by
          postal.tamu.edu (8.9.0/8.9.0) with ESMTP id PAA22601 for
          <advaita-l at postal.tamu.edu>; Mon, 13 Jul 1998 15:04:23 -0500
(CDT)
Received: from localhost (msr at localhost) by lechery.isc.tamu.edu
(8.8.8/8.8.8)
          with SMTP id PAA20090 for <advaita-l at listserv.tamu.edu>; Mon,
13 Jul
          1998 15:04:22 -0500 (CDT)
X-Authentication-Warning: lechery.isc.tamu.edu: msr owned process doing
-bs
X-Sender: msr at lechery
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII
Message-ID:  <Pine.GSO.3.95.980713150326.19731C-100000 at lechery>
Date:         Mon, 13 Jul 1998 15:04:22 -0500
Reply-To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
              <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
Sender: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
              <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: "Ravisankar S. Mayavaram" <msr at ISC.TAMU.EDU>
Subject:      Pilgrimage to India (fwd)
To: ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU

---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Tue, 14 Jul 1998 03:54:45 -0400
From: Savithri Devaraj <sdevaraj at csc.com>
To: msr at reddy20.tamu.edu
Subject: Pilgrimage to India

Namaste,

This is not quite an advaita-related post, so i thought i 'll send it to
you.  If you see it fit for the list, you can mail it there, else you
can let me know and just discard it.

I 'll be on a 5 week visit to India (Bangalore).  I would like to take
this opportunity to further my spiritual enquiry in any small way.  I
will be visiting Sringeri for a couple of days and Tiruvannamalai for a
couple of days.  I also intend to meet Sri Satya Sai Baba.  Does any one
know of other Gurus/jivanamuktas around Bangalore?  I will leave on
Wednesday, July 15th.

I can also be of some small service if any of you want me to get a book
or information from the above mentioned places.

Om namah ShivAya

Savithri.

Dear Mrs. Devaraj:

1. You can visit Mulbagal, 2 hrs. drive from B'lore to
visit the Brindavanam of HH Sri-Pada-Raja.

2. In Mysore, HH Ganapathi SacchidAnanda Swamiji is there.

3. Near, Thiruvannamalai, you can visit the AdhishtAnam/BrindAvanam
of HH GnanAnanda Giri Swami at Thirukkoviloor.

4. At Thirukkoviloor itself, the Brindavanam of HH Ragothama Thirtha's
(a Pontiff of UttarAdi Math) Jeeva samAdhi is there.

5. In Thiruvannamalai, Brindavanam of HH Sri. Seshadri Swamigal
(a senior contemporary of Sri Ramana Bhagawan) is there.

6. Presently, Sri Yogi Ram Surath Kumar is living there. You can
have His dharshan there.

7. Ofcourse, Kanchi is there at 5 hrs drive from B'lore.

With regards,

Sudhakar Marur



______________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

>From  Mon Jul 13 21:23:10 1998
Message-Id: <MON.13.JUL.1998.212310.0700.>
Date: Mon, 13 Jul 1998 21:23:10 -0700
Reply-To: chandran at tidalwave.net
To: List for advaita vedanta as taught by Shri Shankara
        <ADVAITA-L at TAMU.EDU>
From: Ram Chandran <chandran at TIDALWAVE.NET>
Organization: Personal
Subject: Maya
Comments: To: Advaita List <advaita-l at tamu.edu>
Comments: cc: Vivek Anand Ganesan <v_ganesan at YAHOO.COM>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Vivek Anand Ganesan <v_ganesan at YAHOO.COM> writes:

>   I would be very grateful if knowledgeable list members would post
>   an article about the different kinds of Maya and what they mean.

Greetings Vivek:

Maayaa means that which is not absolutely real but which has the power
to appear as real. Sankara explains Maayaa as 'yaa maa saa maayaa'
meaning, "that which is not is maayaa." According to Sankara, the world
is a myth, infact a total dream.  To whom is a dream a dream? A dream is
a dream only to a person who has awakened from the dream. So the world
is not a dream to me or you who are still dreaming! Sankara's conception
of maayaa is from the absolute point of view.  Ravi has already given
you good tips to get more information about maayaa.

Let me briefly explain the two powers of maayaa - aavarana sakti and
vikshepa sakti.   When we mistake a rope for a snake, our inability to
recognize the rope is because of aavarana sakti (concealing power) of
maayaa. The appearance of snake instead of rope is due to the vikshepa
sakti (projecting power) of maayaa. It is this dual cosmic power of
maayaa that brings about the presentation of the physical universe
concealing the totality (Brahman).  Plenty of discussions on the issues
related to the ultimate status of maayaa are readily available in the
Vedantic literature and please refer to them.  A careful internet search
on "maya" can also provide you with more information.

Ram Chandran

