+++
title = "19 S. V. Subrahmanian"
date = "2000-07-13"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001219.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2000-July/001219.html)

Shri Vidyaji wrote:
Is this from his translation of taittirIya upanishad with commentaries?

Reply:
Yes.

Shri Vidyaji wrote:
outmoded, and may be difficult to understand today. Sometimes, he also
uses inexact translations, perhaps to render things more easily in
English.

Reply:

I seemed to get that feeling too.

Shri Vidyaji wrote:
I'm puzzled why you refer to ghaTa and ghaTadeSa (ghaTAkASa??) here.

Reply:
The reason is that my understanding/analysis is itself clouded.  I am not
very clear/confident on the analysis of the following:

1.  Relationship between the existence of the objective world and the
perception of these objects by the knower - their sequence, their process,
their dependence (if at all).  I have some understanding, but not enough
(not to ask the above question-:))

2.  Whatever I have read seems to make sense only in an intellectual sense,
but I am not able to feel it happening in me ie., the process of perceiving
the objects is still one single act in my experience, I cannot feel the
sub-parts (as described in whatever books I have read).  So I seem to have
to constantly refer, as the knowledge is still not mine !!

Shri Vidyaji wrote:

famous vedAntaparibhAshA and vedAntasAra are highly recommended.

Reply:
Do these books deal about the question I have asked above ?


S. V. Subrahmanian
svs_shankara at hotmail.com
---------------------------------------
Help ever.  Hurt never.

________________________________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

--
bhava shankara deshikame sharaNam

Archives : http://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l.html
Help     : Email to listmaster at lists.advaita-vedanta.org
Options  : To leave the list send a mail to
           listserv at lists.advaita-vedanta.org with
           SIGNOFF ADVAITA-L in the body.

