+++
title = "101 H S Chandramouli"
date = "2017-08-07"
upstream_url = "https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046347.html"

+++
[Archive link](https://lists.advaita-vedanta.org/archives/advaita-l/2017-August/046347.html)

Namaste Praveen Ji,



This is regarding my earlier statement that Sri Subbaramaiya, in his
commentary on Sri Dakshinamurthy Stotra, has contended that it advocates
DSV. I based this on two counts. One is that the title given to section 2.1
(dealing with the first verse of the stotra)  is “ DSV “. The second is the
following statement found therein.



Quote  << Unlike the usual run of investigators who are steadfast adherents
or sticklers to certain views which they cherish without question and
demand that the method as well as the content of the teaching be
accommodated in conformity with them, for example, the nAnAjIvavAdins or
the srishtidrishtivAdins, those who are unable to shake off easily the
notion of many jIvAs inhabiting the world, the disciple for whom the
present instruction is offered is a vyutpanna who can take the
mukhyavedAntasiddhanta viz. the EkajIvavAda.  >>  Unquote.



I was just revisiting another text on Naishkarmya Sidhi. In the course of a
comparison between Bhamati and Vivarana schools, the author mentions that
Bhamati is considered as favouring nAnAjIvavAda while Vivarana favours
EkajIvavAda. I was surprised by this and as a consequence went through Sri
Subbaramaiya’s explanation for his above quote in section 2.1. This deals
with the first verse of the Stotra.  As far as I could judge, he is
interpreting the Stotra exactly on the lines of SDV !!!. You may like to
take some time off (not much though) to cross check and come to your own
conclusion. And of course I would be very happy if you could convey your
conclusion also in this regard.



I am very sorry if I have misled you, but you will appreciate that it is
not my fault entirely.



Regards

<https://www.avast.com/sig-email?utm_medium=email&utm_source=link&utm_campaign=sig-email&utm_content=webmail>
Virus-free.
www.avast.com
<https://www.avast.com/sig-email?utm_medium=email&utm_source=link&utm_campaign=sig-email&utm_content=webmail>
<#DAB4FAD8-2DD7-40BB-A1B8-4E2AA1F9FDF2>
